A beta-arrestin/green fluorescent protein biosensor for detecting G protein-coupled receptor activation.
G protein-coupled receptors ( GPCR ) represent the single most important drug targets for medical therapy , and information from genome sequencing and genomic data bases has substantially accelerated their discovery .
The lack of a systematic approach either to identify the function of a new GPCR or to associate it with a cognate ligand has added to the growing number of orphan receptors .
In this work we provide a novel approach to this problem using a beta-arrestin2 \/ green fluorescent protein conjugate ( betaarr2-GFP ) .
It provides a real-time and single cell based assay to monitor GPCR activation and GPCR-G protein-coupled receptor kinase or GPCR-arrestin interactions .
Confocal microscopy demonstrates the translocation of betaarr2-GFP to more than 15 different ligand-activated GPCRs .
These data clearly support the common hypothesis that the beta-arrestin binding of an activated receptor is a convergent step of GPCR signaling , increase by 5-fold the number of GPCRs known to interact with beta-arrestins , demonstrate that the cytosol is the predominant reservoir of biologically active beta-arrestins , and provide the first direct demonstration of the critical importance of G protein-coupled receptor kinase phosphorylation to the biological regulation of beta-arrestin activity and GPCR signal transduction in living cells .
The use of betaarr2-GFP as a biosensor to recognize the activation of pharmacologically distinct GPCRs should accelerate the identification of orphan receptors and permit the optical study of their signal transduction biology intractable to ordinary biochemical methods .
Coats' disease of the retina (unilateral retinal telangiectasis) caused by somatic mutation in the NDP gene: a role for norrin in retinal angiogenesis.
Coats ' disease is characterized by abnormal retinal vascular development ( so-called ` retinal telangiectasis ' ) which results in massive intraretinal and subretinal lipid accumulation ( exudative retinal detachment ) .
The classical form of Coats ' disease is almost invariably isolated , unilateral and seen in males .
A female with a unilateral variant of Coats ' disease gave birth to a son affected by Norrie disease .
Both carried a missense mutation within the NDP gene on chromosome Xp11 .2 .
Subsequently analysis of the retinas of nine enucleated eyes from males with Coats ' disease demonstrated in one a somatic mutation in the NDP gene which was not present within non-retinal tissue .
We suggest that Coats ' telangiectasis is secondary to somatic mutation in the NDP gene which results in a deficiency of norrin ( the protein product of the NDP gene ) within the developing retina .
This supports recent observations that the protein is critical for normal retinal vasculogenesis .
BRCA1 protein is linked to the RNA polymerase II holoenzyme complex via RNA helicase A.
The breast cancer specific tumor suppressor protein , BRCA1 ( refs 1,2 ) , activates transcription when linked with a DNA-binding domain and is a component of the RNA polymerase II ( Pol II ) holoenzyme .
We show here that RNA helicase A ( RHA ) protein links BRCA1 to the holoenzyme complex .
The region of BRCA1 which interacts with RHA and , thus , the holoenzyme complex , corresponds to subregions of the BRCT domain of BRCA1 ( ref .
9 ) .
This interaction was shown to occur in yeast nuclei , and expression in human cells of a truncated RHA molecule which retains binding to BRCA1 inhibited transcriptional activation mediated by the BRCA1 carboxy terminus .
These data are the first to identify a specific protein interaction with the BRCA1 C-terminal domain and are consistent with the model that BRCA1 functions as a transcriptional coactivator .
ERGIC-53, a membrane protein of the endoplasmic reticulum-Golgi intermediate compartment, is identical to MR60, an intracellular mannose-specific lectin of myelomonocytic cells.
A mannose-specific membrane lectin ( MR60 ) isolated from human myelomonocytic HL60 cells by affinity chromatography is expressed in intracellular organelles of immature monocytes ( Pimpaneau , V. , Midoux , P. , Monsigny , M. , and Roche , A. C. ( 1991 ) Carbohydr .
Res .
213 , 95-108 ) .
It is not present at the cell surface and is immunochemically and structurally distinct from the M ( r ) 175,000 mannose receptor of mature macrophages .
MR60 cDNA was isolated and characterized ; on the basis of its sequence , MR60 is not related to any known mammalian lectins .
Surprisingly , MR60 was found to be identical to ERGIC-53 ( Schindler , R. , Itin , C. , Zerial , M. , Lottspeich , F. , and Hauri , H.P. ( 1993 ) Eur .
J. Cell Biol .
61 , 1-9 ) , a type I integral membrane protein , defined as a marker of the intermediate compartment that recycles between the Golgi apparatus and endoplasmic reticulum ; MR60\/ERGIC -53 shares with VIP-36 significant homologies with leguminous plant lectins ( Fiedler , K. , and Simmons , K. ( 1994 ) Cell 77 , 625-626 ) .
We extend these findings in evidencing a structural homology between MR60\/ERGIC -53 and mammalian galectins ( soluble beta galactose binding proteins ) .
MR60\/ERGIC -53 is the first lectin characterized as an endoplasmic reticulum-Golgi protein .
Accordingly , this intracellular mannose binding protein could be involved in the traffic of glycoproteins between endoplasmic reticulum and the Golgi apparatus .
Enhanced growth of MCF-7 breast cancer cells overexpressing parathyroid hormone-related peptide.
PTH-related peptide ( PTHrP ) is a secreted protein produced by breast cancer cells both in vivo and in vitro .
Because of its structural similarity to PTH at the amino terminus , the two proteins interact with a common cell surface receptor , the PTH\/PTHrP receptor .
When overproduced by tumor cells , PTHrP enters the circulation , giving rise to the common paraneoplastic syndrome of humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy .
Although initially discovered in malignancies , PTHrP is now known to be produced by most cells and tissues in the body .
It acts as an autocrine and paracrine mediator of cell proliferation and differentiation , effects which are mediated via the PTH\/PTHrP receptor .
Recent evidence also has shown that , directly after translation , PTHrP is able to enter the nucleus and\/or nucleolus and influence cell cycle progression and apoptosis .
In this study , we have either overproduced PTHrP or inhibited endogenous PTHrP production in the breast cancer cell line , MCF-7 .
Overexpression of PTHrP was associated with an increase in mitogenesis , whereas inhibiting endogenous PTHrP production resulted in decreased cell proliferation .
The overexpressed peptide targeted to the perinuclear space .
In contrast , PTHrP interaction with the cell surface PTH\/PTHrP receptor resulted in decreased cell proliferation in the same cell line .
This latter effect is dependent on interaction with the receptor , in that exogenously added PTHrP moieties known not to interact with the receptor had no effect on cell growth .
Furthermore , neutralization of added peptide with an anti-PTHrP antiserum completely abolished the growth inhibitory effects .
In contrast , this antibody has no effect on the increased proliferation rate of the MCF-7 transfectants that overexpress PTHrP , compared with control cells .
The net effect of autocrine\/paracrine and intracrine effects of PTHrP in MCF-7 cells overproducing the peptide is accelerated cell growth .
These findings have critical implications regarding the role of PTHrP in breast cancer , and they suggest that controlling PTHrP production in breast cancer may be useful therapeutically .
Structure of the CD59-encoding gene: further evidence of a relationship to murine lymphocyte antigen Ly-6 protein.
The gene for CD59 ( membrane inhibitor of reactive lysis ( MIRL ) , protectin ) , a phosphatidylinositol-linked surface glycoprotein that regulates the formation of the polymeric C9 complex of complement and that is deficient on the abnormal hematopoietic cells of patients with paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria , consists of four exons spanning 20 kilobases .
The untranslated first exon is preceded by a G+C - rich promoter region that lacks a consensus TATA or CAAT motif .
The second exon encodes the hydrophobic leader sequence of the protein , and the third exon encodes the amino-terminal portion of the mature protein .
The fourth exon encodes the remainder of the mature protein , including the hydrophobic sequence necessary for glycosyl-phosphatidylinositol anchor attachment .
The structure of the CD59 gene is very similar to that encoding Ly-6 , a murine glycoprotein with which CD59 has some structural similarity .
The striking similarity in gene structure is further evidence that the two proteins belong to a superfamily of proteins that may also include the urokinase plasminogen-activator receptor and a squid glycoprotein of unknown function .
Molecular cloning, expression, and chromosomal localization of a human brain-specific Na(+)-dependent inorganic phosphate cotransporter.
We describe the molecular cloning of a cDNA encoding a human brain Na ( + ) - dependent inorganic phosphate ( P ( i ) ) cotransporter ( hBNPI ) .
The nucleotide and deduced amino acid sequences of hBNPI reveal a protein of 560 amino acids with six to eight putative transmembrane segments .
hBNPI shares a high degree of homology with other Na ( + ) - dependent inorganic P ( i ) cotransporters , including those found in rat brain and human and rabbit kidney .
Expression of hBNPI in COS-1 cells results in Na ( + ) - dependent P ( i ) uptake .
Northern blot analysis demonstrates that hBNPI mRNA is expressed predominantly in brain and most abundantly in neuron-enriched regions such as the amygdala and hippocampus .
Moderate levels of expression are also observed in glia-enriched areas such as the corpus callosum , and low levels are observed in the substantia nigra , subthalamic nuclei , and thalamus .
In situ hybridization histochemistry reveals relatively high levels of hBNPI mRNA in pyramidal neurons of the cerebral cortex and hippocampus and in granule neurons of dentate gyrus .
The level of hBNPI mRNA is quite low in fetal compared with adult human brain , suggesting developmental regulation of hBNPI gene expression .
Southern analyses of nine eukaryotic genomic DNAs probed under stringent conditions with hBNPI cDNA revealed that the hBNPI gene is highly conserved during vertebrate evolution and that each gene is most likely present as a single copy .
Using fluorescent in situ hybridization , we localized hBNPI to the long arm of chromosome 19 ( 19q13 ) in close proximity to the late-onset familial Alzheimer 's disease locus .
Cloning of human acetyl-CoA carboxylase cDNA.
Acetyl-CoA carboxylase is the rate-limiting enzyme in the biogenesis of long-chain fatty acids .
In order to understand the mechanisms that regulate human acetyl-CoA carboxylase at the gene level , and the relationship between its structure and function , cDNA clones for human acetyl-CoA carboxylase have been isolated and sequenced .
Human acetyl-CoA-carboxylase cDNA contains 7020 nucleotides encoding a protein of 2340 amino acids with a calculated relative molecular mass of 264575 .
The human enzyme shows approximately 85 % identity in nucleotide sequence with previously cloned rat acetyl-CoA carboxylase , and shows 90 % identity in the amino acid sequence .
Two human acetyl-CoA-carboxylase mRNA species , which differ in the 5 ' untranslated region with the same coding sequence , have been identified .
The sequence analysis reveals that type I and type II acetyl-CoA-carboxylase mRNA contain 313 - and 173-base-long 5 ' untranslated regions , respectively .
The first 240 nucleotides in the 5 ' untranslated region of type I acetyl-CoA-carboxylase mRNA replace the first 100 nucleotides of the ( G + C ) - rich region of the 5 ' untranslated region of the type II mRNA .
These two species of mRNAs are the only species of human ACC mRNA which have been detected compared to at least five species in rat tissues , and they are expressed in a tissue-specific manner .
I kappa B epsilon, a novel member of the I kappa B family, controls RelA and cRel NF-kappa B activity.
We have isolated a human cDNA which encodes a novel I kappa B family member using a yeast two-hybrid screen for proteins able to interact with the p52 subunit of the transcription factor NF-kappa B. The protein is found in many cell types and its expression is up-regulated following NF-kappa B activation and during myelopoiesis .
Consistent with its proposed role as an I kappa B molecule , I kappa B-epsilon is able to inhibit NF-kappa B-directed transactivation via cytoplasmic retention of rel proteins .
I kappa B-epsilon translation initiates from an internal ATG codon to give rise to a protein of 45 kDa , which exists as multiple phosphorylated isoforms in resting cells .
Unlike the other inhibitors , it is found almost exclusively in complexes containing RelA and\/or cRel .
Upon activation , I kappa B-epsilon protein is degraded with slow kinetics by a proteasome-dependent mechanism .
Similarly to I kappa B-alpha and I kappa B , I kappa B-epsilon contains multiple ankyrin repeats and two conserved serines which are necessary for signal-induced degradation of the molecule .
A unique lysine residue located N-terminal of the serines appears to be not strictly required for degradation .
Unlike I kappa B - alpha and I kappa B-beta , I kappa B-epsilon does not contain a C-terminal PEST-like sequence .
I kappa B-epsilon would , therefore , appear to regulate a late , transient activation of a subset of genes , regulated by RelA\/cRel NF-kappa B complexes , distinct from those regulated by other I kappa B proteins .
SHP2 mediates the protective effect of interleukin-6 against dexamethasone-induced apoptosis in multiple myeloma cells.
Our previous studies have shown that activation of a related adhesion focal tyrosine kinase ( RAFTK ) ( also known as Pyk2 ) is required for dexamethasone ( Dex ) - induced apoptosis in multiple myeloma ( MM ) cells and that human interleukin-6 ( IL-6 ) , a known growth and survival factor for MM cells , blocks both RAFTK activation and apoptosis induced by Dex .
However , the mechanism whereby IL-6 inhibits Dex-induced apoptosis is undefined .
In this study , we demonstrate that protein-tyrosine phosphatase SHP2 mediates this protective effect .
We show that IL-6 triggers selective activation of SHP2 and its association with RAFTK in Dex-treated MM cells .
SHP2 interacts with RAFTK through a region other than its Src homology 2 domains .
We demonstrate that RAFTK is a direct substrate of SHP2 both in vitro and in vivo , and that Tyr ( 906 ) in the C-terminal domain of RAFTK mediates its interaction with SHP2 .
Moreover , overexpression of dominant negative SHP2 blocked the protective effect of IL-6 against Dex-induced apoptosis .
These findings demonstrate that SHP2 mediates the anti-apoptotic effect of IL-6 and suggest SHP2 as a novel therapeutic target in MM .
Cloning of an intrinsic human TFIID subunit that interacts with multiple transcriptional activators.
TFIID is a multisubunit protein complex comprised of the TATA-binding protein ( TBP ) and multiple TBP-associated factors ( TAFs ) .
The TAFs in TFIID are essential for activator-dependent transcription .
The cloning of a complementary DNA encoding a human TFIID TAF , TAFII55 , that has no known homolog in Drosophila TFIID is now described .
TAFII55 is shown to interact with the largest subunit ( TAFII230 ) of human TFIID through its central region and with multiple activators -- including Sp1 , YY1 , USF , CTF , adenoviral E1A , and human immunodeficiency virus-type 1 Tat proteins -- through a distinct amino-terminal domain .
The TAFII55-interacting region of Sp1 was localized to its DNA-binding domain , which is distinct from the glutamine-rich activation domains previously shown to interact with Drosophila TAFII110 .
Thus , this human TFIID TAF may be a co-activator that mediates a response to multiple activators through a distinct mechanism .
A novel secretory tumor necrosis factor-inducible protein (TSG-6) is a member of the family of hyaluronate binding proteins, closely related to the adhesion receptor CD44.
TSG-6 cDNA was isolated by differential screening of a lambda cDNA library prepared from tumor necrosis factor ( TNF ) - treated human diploid FS-4 fibroblasts .
We show that TSG-6 mRNA was not detectable in untreated cells , but became readily induced by TNF in normal human fibroblast lines and in peripheral blood mononuclear cells .
In contrast , TSG-6 mRNA was undetectable in either control or TNF-treated human vascular endothelial cells and a variety of tumor-derived or virus-transformed cell lines .
The sequence of full-length TSG-6 cDNA revealed one major open reading frame predicting a polypeptide of 277 amino acids , including a typical cleavable signal peptide .
The NH2-terminal half of the predicted TSG-6 protein sequence shows a significant homology with a region implicated in hyaluronate binding , present in cartilage link protein , proteoglycan core proteins , and the adhesion receptor CD44 .
The most extensive sequence homology exists between the predicted TSG-6 protein and CD44 .
Western blot analysis with an antiserum raised against a TSG-6 fusion protein detected a 39-kD glycoprotein in the supernatants of TNF-treated FS-4 cells and of cells transfected with TSG-6 cDNA .
Binding of the TSG-6 protein to hyaluronate was demonstrated by coprecipitation .
Our data indicate that the inflammatory cytokine ( TNF or IL-1 ) - inducible , secretory TSG-6 protein is a novel member of the family of hyaluronate binding proteins , possibly involved in cell-cell and cell-matrix interactions during inflammation and tumorigenesis .
Cloning and characterization of a human angiotensin II type 1 receptor.
A human liver cDNA library was screened using a rat type 1 angiotensin II receptor cDNA coding sequence as a probe .
cDNA clones were isolated which encoded a protein of 359 amino acids that shared 94.4 % and 95.3 % identify to rat and bovine type 1 angiotensin II receptors , respectively .
Ligand binding studies of the cloned receptor expressed in COS cells suggested that it is pharmacologically a type 1 angiotensin II receptor subtype .
Electrophysiological studies of the receptor expressed in Xenopus laevis oocytes revealed that it could functionally couple to a second messenger system leading to the mobilization of intracellular stores of calcium .
Southern and Northern blot analyses indicated that the cloned receptor is represented as a single copy in the human genome and is expressed in many tissues of different histogenic origin with the exception of brain , where mRNA transcripts were barely detectable .
Germline mutations in the thyrotropin receptor gene cause non-autoimmune autosomal dominant hyperthyroidism.
The thyrotropin receptor ( TSHR ) , a member of the large family of G protein-coupled receptors , controls both the function and growth of thyroid cells via stimulation of adenylyl cyclase .
We report two different mutations in the TSHR gene of affected members of two large pedigrees with non-autoimmune autosomal dominant hyperthyroidism ( toxic thyroid hyperplasia ) , that involve residues in the third ( Val509Ala ) and seventh ( Cys672Tyr ) transmembrane segments .
When expressed by transfection in COS-7 cells , the mutated receptors display a higher constitutive activation of adenylyl cyclase than wild type .
This new disease entity is the germline counterpart of hyperfunctioning thyroid adenomas , in which different somatic mutations with similar functional characteristics have been demonstrated .
Insertion of beta-satellite repeats identifies a transmembrane protease causing both congenital and childhood onset autosomal recessive deafness.
Approximately 50 % of childhood deafness is caused by mutations in specific genes .
Autosomal recessive loci account for approximately 80 % of nonsyndromic genetic deafness .
Here we report the identification of a new transmembrane serine protease ( TMPRSS3 ; also known as ECHOS1 ) expressed in many tissues , including fetal cochlea , which is mutated in the families used to describe both the DFNB10 and DFNB8 loci .
An 8-bp deletion and insertion of 18 monomeric ( approximately 68-bp ) beta-satellite repeat units , normally present in tandem arrays of up to several hundred kilobases on the short arms of acrocentric chromosomes , causes congenital deafness ( DFNB10 ) .
A mutation in a splice-acceptor site , resulting in a 4-bp insertion in the mRNA and a frameshift , was detected in childhood onset deafness ( DFNB8 ) .
This is the first description of beta-satellite insertion into an active gene resulting in a pathogenic state , and the first description of a protease involved in hearing loss .
Daxx and histone deacetylase II associate with chromatin through an interaction with core histones and the chromatin-associated protein Dek.
Human Daxx is a protein that functions , in part , as a transcriptional co-repressor through its interaction with a growing number of nuclear , DNA-associated proteins .
To determine the mechanism by which hDaxx represses transcription , we used conventional chromatography to isolate endogenous hDaxx .
We determined that hDaxx has an apparent molecular weight of 360 kDa , which is consistent with the fact that multiple domains of hDaxx are required for transcriptional repression and suggests that hDaxx associates with multiple proteins .
Using co-fractionation and co-immunoprecipitation we demonstrate that hDaxx associates with proteins that are critical for transcriptional repression , such as histone deacetylase II , constituents of chromatin such as core histones H2A , H2B , H3 and H4 , and Dek , a chromatin-associated protein reported to change the topology of DNA in chromatin in vitro .
We also demonstrate a requirement for the SPT domain and the first paired amphipathic helix of hDaxx for its association with histone deacetylase II and acetylated histone H4 , respectively .
Finally , we provide evidence suggesting that the association of hDaxx with chromatin-related proteins is dependent on the post-translational phosphorylation status of hDaxx .
A working model for the repressive action of hDaxx through its association with chromatin related proteins is presented .
Studies of the human c-myb gene and its product in human acute leukemias.
The myb gene is the transforming oncogene of the avian myeloblastosis virus ( AMV ) ; its normal cellular homolog , c-myb , is conserved across a broad span of evolution .
In humans , c-myb is expressed in malignant hematopoietic cell lines and in primary hematopoietic tumors .
Partial complementary DNA clones were generated from blast cells of patients with acute myelogenous leukemia .
The sequences of the clones were compared to the c-myb of other species , as well as the v-myb of AMV .
In addition , the carboxyl terminal region of human c-myb was placed in an expression vector to obtain protein for the generation of antiserum , which was used to identify the human c-myb gene product .
Like v-myb , this protein was found within the nucleus of leukemic cells where it was associated with the nuclear matrix .
These studies provide further evidence that c-myb might be involved in human leukemia .
A G protein-coupled receptor for UDP-glucose.
Uridine 5 ' - diphosphoglucose ( UDP-glucose ) has a well established biochemical role as a glycosyl donor in the enzymatic biosynthesis of carbohydrates .
It is less well known that UDP-glucose may possess pharmacological activity , suggesting that a receptor for this molecule may exist .
Here , we show that UDP-glucose , and some closely related molecules , potently activate the orphan G protein-coupled receptor KIAA0001 heterologously expressed in yeast or mammalian cells .
Nucleotides known to activate P2Y receptors were inactive , indicating the distinctly novel pharmacology of this receptor .
The receptor is expressed in a wide variety of human tissues , including many regions of the brain .
These data suggest that some sugar-nucleotides may serve important physiological roles as extracellular signaling molecules in addition to their familiar role in intermediary metabolism .
Cloning, chromosomal localization, and tissue expression of autotaxin from human teratocarcinoma cells.
Autotaxin , a potent human tumor cell motility-stimulating exophosphodiesterase , was isolated and cloned from the human teratocarcinoma cell line NTera2D1 .
The deduced amino acid sequence for the teratocarcinoma autotaxin has 94 % identity to the melanoma-derived protein , 90 % identity to rat brain phosphodiesterase I\/nucleotide pyrophosphatase ( PD-I alpha ) , and 44 % identity to the plasma cell membrane marker PC-I .
Utilizing polymerase chain reaction screening of the CEPH YAC library , we localized the autotaxin gene to human chromosome 8q23-24 .
Northern blot analysis of relative mRNA from multiple human tissues revealed that autotaxin mRNA steady state expression is most abundant in brain , placenta , ovary , and small intestine .
IL-4 enhances keratinocyte expression of CXCR3 agonistic chemokines.
IFN-induced protein of 10 kDa ( IP-10 ) , monokine induced by IFN-gamma ( Mig ) , and IFN-inducible T-cell alpha-chemoattractant ( I-TAC ) belong to the non-glutamate-leucine-arginine motif CXC chemokine family and act solely through the CXCR3 receptor for potent attraction of T lymphocytes .
In this study , we evaluated the capacity of the T cell-derived cytokines IL-4 , IL-10 , and IL-17 to modulate IP-10 , Mig , and I-TAC in cultured human keratinocytes and CXCR3 expression in T cells from allergic contact dermatitis ( ACD ) .
IL-4 , but not IL-10 or IL-17 , significantly up-regulated IFN-gamma - or TNF-alpha-induced IP-10 , Mig , and I-TAC mRNA accumulation in keratinocytes and increased the levels of IP-10 and Mig in keratinocyte supernatants .
Immunohistochemistry of skin affected by ACD revealed that ) 70 % of infiltrating cells were reactive for CXCR3 and that CXCR3 staining colocalized in CD4 + and CD8 + T cells .
Nickel-specific CD4 + and CD8 + T cell lines established from ACD skin produced IFN-gamma and IL-4 and expressed moderate to high levels of CXCR3 .
Finally , CXCR3 agonistic chemokines released by stimulated keratinocytes triggered calcium mobilization in skin-derived nickel-specific CD4 + T cells and promoted their migration , with supernatant from keratinocyte cultures stimulated with IFN-gamma and IL-4 attracting more efficaciously than supernatant from keratinocytes activated with IFN-gamma alone .
In conclusion , IL-4 exerts a proinflammatory function on keratinocytes by potentiating IFN-gamma and TNF-alpha induction of IP-10 , Mig , and I-TAC , which in turn may determine a prominent recruitment of CXCR3 + T lymphocytes at inflammatory reaction sites .
Receptor-associated Mad homologues synergize as effectors of the TGF-beta response.
Transforming growth factor-beta TGF-beta is the prototype for a family of extracellular proteins that affect cell proliferation and tissue differentiation .
TGF-beta-related factors , including BMP-2 \/ 4 , Dpp and activin , act through two types of serine\/threonine kinase receptors which can form a heteromeric complex .
However , the mechanism of signal transduction by these receptors is largely unknown .
In Drosophila , Mad is required for signalling by Dpp .
We have isolated complementary DNAs for four human Mad homologs , one of which , hMAD-4 , is identical to DPC-4 , a candidate tumor suppressor .
hMAD-3 and -4 synergized to induce strong ligand-independent TGF-beta-like responses .
When truncated at their carboxy termini , hMAD-3 and -4 act as dominant-negative inhibitors of the normal TGF-beta response .
The activity of hMAD-3 and -4 was regulated by the TGF-beta receptors , and hMAD-3 but not hMAD-4 was phosphorylated and associated with the ligand-bound receptor complex .
These results define hMAD-3 and -4 as effectors of the TGF-beta response and demonstrate a function for DPCA-4 \/ hMAD-4 as a tumor suppressor .
A human mitochondrial ATP-dependent protease that is highly homologous to bacterial Lon protease.
We have cloned a human ATP-dependent protease that is highly homologous to members of the bacterial Lon protease family .
The cloned gene encodes a protein of 963 amino acids with a calculated molecular mass of 106 kDa , slightly higher than that observed by Western blotting the protein from human tissues and cell lines ( 100 kDa ) .
A single species of mRNA was found for this Lon protease in all human tissues examined .
The protease is encoded in the nucleus , and the amino-terminal portion of the protein sequence contains a potential mitochondrial targeting presequence .
Immunofluorescence microscopy suggested a predominantly mitochondrial localization for the Lon protease in cultured human cells .
A truncated LON gene , in which translation was initiated at Met118 of the coding sequence , was expressed in Escherichia coli and produced a protease that degraded alpha-casein in vitro in an ATP-dependent manner and had other properties similar to E. coli Lon protease .
Molecular cloning and characterization of a novel human sperm antigen (HE2) specifically expressed in the proximal epididymis.
A novel human cDNA encoding a small secretory glycopeptide specifically expressed within the caput and proximal corpus regions of the human epididymis , HE2 , has been cloned and sequenced .
Southern hybridization analysis showed it to be derived from a single-copy gene .
A subclone containing the coding region of the mature peptide was used to generate the putatively encoded peptide as a 10,000 M ( r ) recombinant fusion protein in a bacterial expression system .
This recombinant HE2 protein , as well as an oligopeptide deduced from the open-reading frame , was used to raise polyclonal antisera .
Immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence showed that the predicted HE2 peptide is present in the epididymal epithelium and on the sperm surface , where it adopts a typical antigenic pattern with a subacrosomal equatorial distribution on the sperm head .
Human peroxisomal targeting signal-1 receptor restores peroxisomal protein import in cells from patients with fatal peroxisomal disorders.
Two peroxisomal targeting signals , PTS1 and PTS2 , are involved in the import of proteins into the peroxisome matrix .
Human patients with fatal generalized peroxisomal deficiency disorders fall into at least nine genetic complementation groups .
Cells from many of these patients are deficient in the import of PTS1-containing proteins , but the causes of the protein-import defect in these patients are unknown .
We have cloned and sequenced the human cDNA homolog ( PTS1R ) of the Pichia pastoris PAS8 gene , the PTS1 receptor ( McCollum , D. , E. Monosov , and S. Subramani .
1993 .
J. Cell Biol .
121:761 -774 ) .
The PTS1R mRNA is expressed in all human tissues examined .
Antibodies to the human PTS1R recognize this protein in human , monkey , rat , and hamster cells .
The protein is localized mainly in the cytosol but is also found to be associated with peroxisomes .
Part of the peroxisomal PTS1R protein is tightly bound to the peroxisomal membrane .
Antibodies to PTS1R inhibit peroxisomal protein-import of PTS1-containing proteins in a permeabilized CHO cell system .
In vitro-translated PTS1R protein specifically binds a serine-lysine-leucine-peptide .
A PAS8-PTS1R fusion protein complements the P. pastoris pas8 mutant .
The PTS1R cDNA also complements the PTS1 protein-import defect in skin fibroblasts from patients -- belonging to complementation group two -- diagnosed as having neonatal adrenoleukodystrophy or Zellweger syndrome .
The PTS1R gene has been localized to a chromosomal location where no other peroxisomal disorder genes are known to map .
Our findings represent the only case in which the molecular basis of the protein-import deficiency in human peroxisomal disorders is understood .
Sequence identity between human pancreatic cholesterol esterase and bile salt-stimulated milk lipase.
Three overlapping cDNA clones covering the entire primary sequence of the bile salt stimulated lipase in human milk were isolated from a human breast lambda gt10 cDNA library by screening with the rat pancreatic cholesterol esterase cDNA .
Nucleotide sequencing of the cDNA showed that the human milk lipase mRNA encodes a 748-residue protein , including a 23-residue signal peptide .
The human milk lipase cDNA is highly homologous to rat pancreatic cholesterol esterase , suggesting that the milk lipase may be identical to the cholesterol esterase in human pancreas .
This conclusion was confirmed by isolation and sequencing of the cDNA for human pancreatic cholesterol esterase .
Analysis of the sequence for the human cholesterol esterase\/milk lipase revealed similarities to other serine esterases in three distinct regions of the protein .
These domains may represent the active site triads of these proteins .
Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) upregulates BCL-2 and inhibits apoptosis in human and murine mammary adenocarcinoma cells.
Tumour progression is regulated by the balance of proliferation and apoptosis in the tumor cell population .
To date , the role of vascular endothelial growth factor ( VEGF ) in tumor growth has been attributed to the induction of angiogenesis .
VEGF has been shown to be a survival factor for endothelial cells , preventing apoptosis by inducing Bcl-2 expression .
In both murine ( 4T1 ) and human ( MDA-MB-231 ) metastatic mammary carcinoma cell lines , we found that VEGF upregulated Bcl-2 expression and anti-VEGF antibodies reduced Bcl-2 expression .
These alterations in Bcl-2 expression were reflected by the levels of tumor cell apoptosis .
VEGF resulted in reduced tumor cell apoptosis , whereas its inhibition with anti-VEGF neutralizing antibodies induced apoptosis directly in tumor cells .
Therefore , in addition to its role in angiogenesis and vessel permeability , VEGF acts as a survival factor for tumor cells , inducing Bcl-2 expression and inhibiting tumor cell apoptosis .
Crystal structures of human calcineurin and the human FKBP12-FK506-calcineurin complex.
Calcineurin ( CaN ) is a calcium - and calmodulin-dependent protein serine\/threonine phosphate which is critical for several important cellular processes , including T-cell activation .
CaN is the target of the immunosuppressive drugs cyclosporin A and FK506 , which inhibit CaN after forming complexes with cytoplasmic binding proteins ( cyclophilin and FKBP12 , respectively ) .
We report here the crystal structures of full-length human CaN at 2.1 A resolution and of the complex of human CaN with FKBP12-FK506 at 3.5 A resolution .
In the native CaN structure , an auto-inhibitory element binds at the Zn\/Fe-containing active site .
The metal-site geometry and active-site water structure suggest a catalytic mechanism involving nucleophilic attack on the substrate phosphate by a metal-activated water molecule .
In the FKBP12-FK506-CaN complex , the auto-inhibitory element is displaced from the active site .
The site of binding of FKBP12-FK506 appears to be shared by other non-competitive inhibitors of calcineurin , including a natural anchoring protein .
Mutations in the gene encoding the alpha subunit of the rod cGMP-gated channel in autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa.
Mutations in the genes encoding two proteins of the retinal rod phototransduction cascade , opsin and the beta subunit of rod cGMP phosphodiesterase , cause retinitis pigmentosa ( RP ) in some families .
Here we report defects in a third member of this biochemical pathway in still other patients with this disease .
We screened 94 unrelated patients with autosomal dominant RP and 173 unrelated patients with autosomal recessive RP for mutations in the gene encoding the alpha subunit of the rod cGMP-gated cation channel .
Five mutant sequences cosegregated with disease among four unrelated families with autosomal recessive RP .
Two of these were nonsense mutations early in the reading frame ( Glu76End and Lys139End ) and one was a deletion encompassing most if not all of the transcriptional unit ; these three alleles would not be expected to encode a functional channel .
The remaining two mutations were a missense mutation ( Ser316Phe ) and a frameshift ( Arg654 ( 1-bp del ) ) mutation truncating the last 32 aa in the C terminus .
The latter two mutations were expressed in vitro and found to encode proteins that were predominantly retained inside the cell instead of being targeted to the plasma membrane .
We conclude that the absence or paucity of functional cGMP-gated cation channels in the plasma membrane is deleterious to rod photoreceptors and is an uncommon cause of RP .
A specific human lysophospholipase: cDNA cloning, tissue distribution and kinetic characterization.
Lysophospholipases are critical enzymes that act on biological membranes to regulate the multifunctional lysophospholipids ; increased levels of lysophospholipids are associated with a host of diseases .
Herein we report the cDNA cloning of a human brain 25 kDa lysophospholipid-specific lysophospholipase ( hLysoPLA ) .
The enzyme ( at both mRNA and protein levels ) is widely distributed in tissues , but with quite different abundances .
The hLysoPLA hydrolyzes lysophosphatidylcholine in both monomeric and micellar forms , and exhibits apparent cooperativity and surface dilution kinetics , but not interfacial activation .
Detailed kinetic analysis indicates that the hLysoPLA binds first to the micellar surface and then to the substrate presented on the surface .
The kinetic parameters associated with this surface dilution kinetic model are reported , and it is concluded that hLysoPLA has a single substrate binding site and a surface recognition site .
The apparent cooperativity observed is likely due to the change of substrate presentation .
In contrast to many non-specific lipolytic enzymes that exhibit lysophospholipase activity , hLysoPLA hydrolyzes only lysophospholipids and has no other significant enzymatic activity .
Of special interest , hLysoPLA does not act on plasmenylcholine .
Of the several inhibitors tested , only methyl arachidonyl fluorophosphonate ( MAFP ) potently and irreversibly inhibits the enzymatic activity .
The inhibition by MAFP is consistent with the catalytic mechanism proposed for the enzyme - a serine hydrolase with a catalytic triad composed of Ser-119 , Asp-174 and His-208 .
Cloning and characterization of hOGG1, a human homolog of the OGG1 gene of Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
The OGG1 gene of Saccharomyces cerevisiae encodes a DNA glycosylase activity that is a functional analog of the Fpg protein from Escherichia coli and excises 7,8-dihydro-8-oxoguanine ( 8-oxoG ) from damaged DNA .
The repair of this ubiquitous kind of oxidative damage is essential to prevent mutations both in bacteria and in yeast .
A human cDNA clone carrying an ORF displaying homology to the yeast protein was identified .
The predicted protein has 345 amino acids and a molecular mass of 39 kDa .
This protein shares a 38 % sequence identity with the yeast Ogg1 protein , adding this novel human gene product to the growing family of enzymes that the repair of oxidatively damaged bases and are related to the E. coli endonuclease III .
Northern blot analysis indicates that this gene , localized to chromosome 3p25 , is ubiquitously expressed in human tissues .
The cloned coding sequence was expressed in an E. coli strain that carried a disrupted fpg gene , the bacterial functional analog of OGG1 .
Cell-free extracts from these cultures displayed a specific lyase activity on duplex DNA that carried an 8-oxoG\/C base pair .
The products of the reaction are consistent with an enzymatic activity like the one displayed by the yeast Ogg1 .
Analysis of the substrate specificity reveals a very strong preference for DNA fragments harboring 8-oxoG\/C base pairs .
The pattern of specificity correlates well with the one found for the yeast enzyme .
Moreover , when the human coding sequence was expressed in a yeast strain mutant in OGG1 it was able to complement the spontaneous mutator phenotype .
These results make this novel gene ( hOGG1 ) a strong candidate for the human homolog of the yeast OGG1 and suggest an important role of its product in the protection of the genome from the mutagenic effects of the oxidatively damaged purines .
The MAD-related protein Smad7 associates with the TGFbeta receptor and functions as an antagonist of TGFbeta signaling.
TGFbeta signaling is initiated when the type I receptor phosphorylates the MAD-related protein , Smad2 , on C-terminal serine residues .
This leads to Smad2 association with Smad4 , translocation to the nucleus , and regulation of transcriptional responses .
Here we demonstrate that Smad7 is an inhibitor of TGFbeta signaling .
Smad7 prevents TGFbeta-dependent formation of Smad2\/Smad4 complexes and inhibits the nuclear accumulation of Smad2 .
Smad7 interacts stably with the activated TGFbeta type I receptor , thereby blocking the association , phosphorylation , and activation of Smad2 .
Furthermore , mutations in Smad7 that interfere with receptor binding disrupt its inhibitory activity .
These studies thus define a novel function for MAD-related proteins as intracellular antagonists of the type I kinase domain of TGFbeta family receptors .
Expression cloning of a cocaine- and antidepressant-sensitive human noradrenaline transporter.
At most synapses , chemical signalling is terminated by a rapid reaccumulation of neurotransmitter into presynaptic terminals .
Uptake systems for the biogenic amines are the initial site of action for therapeutic antidepressants and drugs such as cocaine and the amphetamines .
We have isolated a complementary DNA clone encoding a human noradrenaline transporter .
The cDNA sequence predicts a protein of 617 amino acids , with 12-13 highly hydrophobic regions compatible with membrane-spanning domains .
Expression of the cDNA clone in transfected HeLa cells indicates that noradrenaline transport activity is sodium-dependent and sensitive to selective noradrenaline transport inhibitors .
Transporter RNA is localized to the brainstem and the adrenal gland .
The predicted protein sequence demonstrates significant amino-acid identity with the Na + \/ gamma-aminobutyric acid transporter , thus identifying a new gene family for neurotransmitter transporter proteins .
Analysis of its structure and function may lead to structure-based drug design for the treatment of human depression and could help determine whether transporter abnormalities underlie affective disorders .
cDNAs encoding the large subunit of human replication factor C.
Replication factor C ( RFC ) is a multisubunit , DNA polymerase accessory protein required for the coordinated synthesis of both DNA strands during simian virus 40 DNA replication in vitro .
Previous studies have shown that RFC is a DNA-dependent ATPase that binds in a structure-specific manner to the 3 ' end of a primer hybridized to a template DNA , an activity thought intrinsic to the 140-kDa component of this multisubunit complex .
Here , the isolation and analysis of cDNAs encoding this subunit is described .
Analysis of the full-length coding sequence revealed an open reading frame of 3.4 kb , encoding an 1148-amino acid protein with a predicted molecular mass of 130 kDa .
A putative ATP-binding motif was observed that is similar to a motif in several of the smaller subunits of RFC and in functionally homologous replication factors of bacterial and viral origin .
A '' DEAD '' box is also conserved among these proteins .
The predicted protein shows significant identity with a DNA-binding protein of murine origin ( B. Luckow , P. Lichter , and G. Schütz , personal communication ) .
Regions of similarity were also seen between the amino acid sequences of the 140-kDa subunit of RFC , poly ( ADP-ribose ) polymerase , and bacterial DNA ligases -- possibly representing a conserved structural feature of these proteins that bind similar DNA substrates .
Identification of the Ah receptor nuclear translocator protein (Arnt) as a component of the DNA binding form of the Ah receptor.
The Ah ( dioxin ) receptor binds a number of widely disseminated environmental pollutants , including 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin ( TCDD ) and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons , and mediates their carcinogenic effects .
The ligand-bound receptor activates Cyp 1a1 gene transcription through interaction with specific DNA sequences , termed xenobiotic responsive elements ( XREs ) .
The Ah receptor nuclear translocator protein ( Arnt ) is required for Ah receptor function .
Arnt is now shown to be a structural component of the XRE binding form of the Ah receptor .
Furthermore , Arnt and the ligand-binding subunit of the receptor were extracted as a complex from the nuclei of cells treated with ligand .
Arnt contains a basic helix-loop-helix motif , which may be responsible for interacting with both the XRE and the ligand-binding subunit .
The human GRAF gene is fused to MLL in a unique t(5;11)(q31;q23) and both alleles are disrupted in three cases of myelodysplastic syndrome/acute myeloid leukemia with a deletion 5q.
We have isolated the human GRAF gene ( for GTPase regulator associated with the focal adhesion kinase pp125 ( FAK ) ) .
This gene was fused with MLL in a unique t ( 5 ; 11 ) ( q31 ; q23 ) that occurred in an infant with juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia .
GRAF encodes a member of the Rho family of the GTPase-activating protein ( GAP ) family .
On the protein level , it is 90 % homologous to the recently described chicken GRAF gene that functions as a GAP of RhoA in vivo and is thus a critical component of the integrin signaling transduction pathway .
The particular position of the human GRAF gene at 5q31 and the proposed antiproliferative and tumor suppressor properties of its avian homolog suggest that it also might be pathogenetically relevant for hematologic malignancies with deletions of 5q .
To investigate this possibility , we sequenced 4-5 individual cDNA clones from 13 cases in which one allele of GRAF was deleted .
We found point mutations within the GAP domain of the second GRAF allele in one patient .
In two additional patients we found an insertion of 52 or 74 bp within the GRAF cDNA that generates a reading frame shift followed by a premature stop codon .
GRAF maps outside the previously defined commonly deleted 5q31 region .
Nevertheless , inactivation of both alleles in at least some cases suggests that deletions and mutations of the GRAF gene may be instrumental in the development and progression of hematopoeitic disorders with a del ( 5q ) .
Molecular cloning and primary structure of human 15-lipoxygenase.
A full-length cDNA encoding 15-lipoxygenase has been isolated from a human reticulocyte cDNA library .
The predicted primary structure of the enzyme exhibits a sequence similarity of 61 % and 45 % with human 5-lipoxygenase and the soybean lipoxygenase isoenzyme I , respectively .
When all three lipoxygenases are aligned , there are two distinct regions of significant sequence identity including a cluster of five histidine residues conserved in all three lipoxygenases .
Because histidines can serve as ligands for the enzymatically active iron , this region may be critical to enzymatic function .
These results provide a basis for exploring functional domains of lipoxygenases .
Identification of a new tumour-associated antigen TM4SF5 and its expression in human cancer.
In a previous large-scale screening for differentially expressed genes in pancreatic cancer , a gene was identified that was highly overexpressed in pancreatic cancer encoding a novel putative tetraspan transmembrane protein highly homologous to the tumour-associated antigen L6 .
Using a radiation hybrid panel the identified human gene named TM4SF5 ( transmembrane 4 superfamily member 5 ) was localized to chromosome 17 in the region 17p13 .3 .
The cloned TM4SF5 cDNA has a 32bp 5 ' - untranslated region ( UTR ) , a 591bp open reading frame ( ORF ) and a 85bp 3 ` UTR .
The predicted TM4SF5 protein with 197 amino acids contains three NH2-terminal hydrophobic transmembrane regions , followed by an extracellular hydrophilic domain containing two potential N-linked glycosylation sites and a COOH-terminal hydrophobic transmembrane region .
These structural features are shared by the L6 antigen and a number of related cell surface proteins associated with cell growth .
TM4SF5 was overexpressed in pancreatic cancer tissues as compared to both normal pancreas and chronic pancreatitis tissues , and was detected at high levels in other tumor tissues .
Although the precise function of TM4SF5 remains to be elucidated it may be useful in a clinical setting for tumor diagnosis and\/or therapy .
This hypothesis is supported by the strong homology to the L6 antigen , which has proved promising in immunological , therapeutic and diagnostic approaches .
Isolation and characterization of a structural homologue of human PRK2 from rat liver. Distinguishing substrate and lipid activator specificities.
A homolog of human protein kinase C ( PKC ) - related kinase-2 , PRK2 , which had previously escaped identification in normal mammalian tissues , was isolated from rat liver as the protease-activated kinase ( PAK ) originally named PAK-2 .
The 130-kDa cytosolic enzyme was purified to homogeneity and shown by tryptic peptide and reverse transcriptase - polymerase chain reaction ( RT-PCR ) - amplified rat cDNA sequence analyses to be structurally related to the 116-kDa rat hepatic PAK-1 \/ protein kinase N ( PKN ) and , even more closely ( 95 % sequence identity ) to the 130-kDa human PKC-related kinase , PRK2 .
Rat myeloma RNA was used as the RT-PCR template because of its relative abundance in PAK-2 \/ PRK2 mRNA compared with liver and other rat tissues .
The catalytic properties of PAK-2 \/ PRK2 in many respects resembled those of hepatic PAK-1 \/ PKN , but were distinguished by more favorable kinetics with several peptide substrates , and greater sensitivity to PKC pseudosubstrate and polybasic amino acid inhibitors .
PAK-2 \/ PRK2 was also activated by lipids , particularly cardiolipin and to a lesser extent by other acidic phospholipids and unsaturated fatty acids .
Cardiolipin activation was most evident with autophosphorylation and histone H2B phosphorylation , but only marginally evident with the favored ribosomal S6 - ( 229-239 ) peptide substrate for the protease-activated kinase activity .
It was concluded that PAK-2 is the rat homolog of human PRK2 , with biochemical properties distinct from although overlapping those of the PAK-1 \/ PKN\/PRK1 isoform .
Identification of a retinoic acid responsive aldoketoreductase expressed in HL60 leukaemic cells.
Neutrophil and monocyte differentiation can be induced in HL60 leukemia cells by all-trans-retinoic acid ( ATRA ) and 1alpha,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 ( D3 ) , respectively , whose differentiating effects can be enhanced by exposure to ` anti-inflammatory agents ' and steroids .
We have provided evidence that this potentiation is via inhibition of the activity of an enzyme of the aldoketoreductase ( AKR ) family , but had failed to identify expression of known AKRs in HL60 cells .
In this study , we have identified a previously unclassified aldoketoreductase family member ( termed HAKR e ) that is expressed in HL60 cells .
HAKR e is dramatically and transiently up-regulated in HL60 cells within 24 h of exposure to ATRA , further supporting the proposition that a member ( s ) of this family of enzymes play ( s ) a role in controlling cell growth and\/or differentiation .
A novel human protease similar to the interleukin-1 beta converting enzyme induces apoptosis in transfected cells.
We have identified a novel cDNA encoding a protein ( named TX ) with ) 50 % overall sequence identity with the interleukin-1 beta converting enzyme ( ICE ) and approximately 30 % sequence identity with the ICE homologs NEDD-2 \/ ICH-1L and CED-3 .
A computer homology model of TX was constructed based on the X-ray coordinates of the ICE crystal recently published .
This model suggests that TX is a cysteine protease , with the P1 aspartic acid substrate specificity retained .
Transfection experiments demonstrate that TX is a protease which is able to cleave itself and the p30 ICE precursor , but not to generate mature IL-1 beta from pro-IL-1 beta .
In addition , this protein induces apoptosis in transfected COS cells .
TX therefore delineates a new member of the growing Ice\/ced -3 gene family coding for proteases with cytokine processing activity or involved in programmed cell death .
Cloning of a novel tumor necrosis factor-alpha-inducible primary response gene that is differentially expressed in development and capillary tube-like formation in vitro.
TNF is a proinflammatory cytokine that has pleiotropic effects on cells and tissues , mediated in large part by alterations in target tissue gene expression .
We have used the technique of differential hybridization to identify several primary response genes induced by TNF in human umbilical vein endothelial ( HUVE ) cells , a cell type that is profoundly activated by cytokine treatment .
One of these cDNA , designated B94 , detects a rapidly and transiently induced 4-kb transcript in TNF-treated HUVE cells , and this transcript is superinduced in the concomitant presence of cycloheximide .
Other proinflammatory stimuli including IL-1 beta and LPS are also able to induce B94 mRNA expression .
Nuclear run-on experiments demonstrate that TNF induction of B94 transcript occurs primarily at the level of transcriptional activation .
Further , B94 is shown to be a single copy gene that is evolutionarily conserved .
The gene is localized to the q32 region of chromosome 14 , a region that is often rearranged in lymphoid neoplasms .
B94 transcript expression is also found to be regulated during mouse development and in an in vitro model of endothelial capillary tube formation .
Developmental regulation occurs most prominently in mouse embryonic liver and kidney , and a second smaller form of B94 transcript is detected in the placenta and testes .
B94 and other TNF-responsive transcripts are also induced during capillary tube formation suggesting overlap between genes induced by TNF and those induced during angiogenesis .
Sequence analysis of the B94 cDNA reveals an open reading frame encoding a 73-kDa polypeptide that has no homology to any known protein .
Polyclonal antisera directed against the carboxyl-terminal portion of the B94 protein immunoprecipitates a protein of the predicted molecular mass both from COS cells transfected with a B94 expression vector and from TNF-treated HUVE cells .
Molecular cloning and centrosomal localization of human caltractin.
Caltractin , a 20-kDa calcium-binding protein , was previously purified and cloned at the DNA level from the unicellular green alga Chlamydomonas .
It is a structural component of the basal body complex , the major microtubule-organizing center in Chlamydomonas and the functional homolog of the centrosome in the animal cell .
Here we report the characterization of a cDNA encoding a human caltractin that shares a high degree of amino acid identity ( 70 % ) with its algal counterpart .
Caltractin was identified in both HeLa and BHK cells as a 21-kDa polypeptide specifically localized to the centrosome of interphase and mitotic cells .
The high level of conservation in the amino acid sequence of caltractin from algae to humans and its association with the major microtubule-organizing center in the cell suggest that caltractin plays a fundamental role in microtubule-organizing center structure and function .
Primary adhalinopathy: a common cause of autosomal recessive muscular dystrophy of variable severity.
Marked deficiency of muscle adhalin , a 50 kDa sarcolemmal dystrophin-associated glycoprotein , has been reported in severe childhood autosomal recessive muscular dystrophy ( SCARMD ) .
This is a Duchenne-like disease affecting both males and females first described in Tunisian families .
Adhalin deficiency has been found in SCARMD patients from North Africa Europe , Brazil , Japan and North America ( SLR & KPC , unpublished data ) .
The disease was initially linked to an unidentified gene on chromosome 13 in families from North Africa , and to the adhalin gene itself on chromosome 17q in one French family in which missense mutations were identified .
Thus there are two kinds of myopathies with adhalin deficiency : one with a primary defect of adhalin ( primary adhalinopathies ) , and one in which absence of adhalin is secondary to a separate gene defect on chromosome 13 .
We have examined the importance of primary adhalinopathies among myopathies with adhalin deficiency , and describe several additional mutations ( null and missense ) in the adhalin gene in 10 new families from Europe and North Africa .
Disease severity varies in age of onset and rate of progression , and patients with null mutations are the most severely affected .
ICE-LAP6, a novel member of the ICE/Ced-3 gene family, is activated by the cytotoxic T cell protease granzyme B.
Members of the ICE\/Ced -3 gene family are likely effector components of the cell death machinery .
Here , we characterize a novel member of this family designated ICE-LAP6 .
By phylogenetic analysis , ICE-LAP6 is classified into the Ced-3 subfamily which includes Ced-3 , Yama\/CPP32\/apopain , Mch2 , and ICE-LAP3 \/ Mch3\/CMH -1 .
Interestingly , ICE-LAP6 contains an active site QACGG pentapeptide , rather than the QACRG pentapeptide shared by other family members .
Overexpression of ICE-LAP6 induces apoptosis in MCF7 breast carcinoma cells .
More importantly , ICE-LAP6 is proteolytically processed into an active cysteine protease by granzyme B , an important component of cytotoxic T cell-mediated apoptosis .
Once activated , ICE-LAP6 is able to cleave the death substrate poly ( ADP-ribose ) polymerase into signature apoptotic fragments .
Ectodysplasin is a collagenous trimeric type II membrane protein with a tumor necrosis factor-like domain and co-localizes with cytoskeletal structures at lateral and apical surfaces of cells.
Anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia ( EDA ) is a human genetic disorder of impaired ectodermal appendage development .
The EDA gene encodes isoforms of a novel transmembrane protein , ectodysplasin .
The sequence of the longest isoform includes an interrupted collagenous domain of 19 Gly-X-Y repeats and a motif conserved in the tumor necrosis factor ( TNF ) - related ligand family .
In order to understand better the function of the ectodysplasin protein molecule and its domains , we have studied the processing and localization of wild-type and mutated isoforms in transfected human fetal kidney 293 and monkey kidney COS-1 cells .
Similar to other members of collagenous membrane proteins and members of TNF-related ligands , ectodysplasin is a type II membrane protein and it forms trimers .
The membrane localization of ectodysplasin is asymmetrical : it is found on the apical and lateral surfaces of the cells where it co-localizes with cytoskeletal structures .
The TNF-like motif and cysteines found near the C-terminus are necessary for correct transport to the cell membrane , but the intracellular and collagenous domains are not required for the localization pattern .
Our results suggest that ectodysplasin is a new member in the TNF-related ligand family involved in the early epithelial-mesenchymal interaction that regulates ectodermal appendage formation .
Isolation and properties of cDNA clones encoding SRF, a transcription factor that binds to the c-fos serum response element.
The serum response element ( SRE ) is a sequence required for transient transcriptional activation of genes in response to growth factors .
We have isolated cDNA clones encoding serum response factor ( SRF ) , a ubiquitous nuclear protein that binds to the SRE .
The SRF gene is highly conserved through evolution , and in cultured cells its transcription is itself transiently increased following serum stimulation .
A cDNA clone of SRF expressed in vitro generates protein that forms complexes indistinguishable from those formed with HeLa cell SRF , as judged by DNA binding specificity and the ability to promote SRE-dependent in vitro transcription .
SRF binds DNA as a dimer , and the DNA binding\/dimerization domain of the protein exhibits striking homology to two yeast regulatory proteins .
Endothelial cell costimulation of T cell activation through CD58-CD2 interactions involves lipid raft aggregation.
Human endothelial cells ( EC ) costimulate CD4 ( + ) memory T cell activation through CD58-CD2 interactions .
In this study we tested the hypothesis that EC activate distinct costimulatory pathways in T cells that target specific transcription factors .
AP-1 , composed of fos and jun proteins , is a critical effector of TCR signaling and binds several sites in the IL-2 promoter .
EC augment c-fos promoter activity in T cells ; however , deletion analysis reveals no transcription factor binding sites in the promoter uniquely responsive to EC costimulation .
Overexpression of AP-1 proteins in T cells augments the activity of an AP-1-luciferase reporter gene equally in the absence or the presence of EC costimulation .
Interestingly , EC stimulate a similar 2 - to 3-fold up-regulation of AP-1 , NF-AT , NF-kappaB , and NF-IL-2-luciferase reporters .
CD2 mAbs completely block EC effects on all of these pathways , as well as costimulation of IL-2 secretion .
We conclude that EC costimulation through CD2 does not trigger a single distinct costimulatory pathway in T cells , but rather , it amplifies several pathways downstream of the TCR .
Indeed , we find that early EC costimulation acts '' upstream '' of the TCR by promoting lipid raft aggregation , thus amplifying TCR signaling .
Soluble CD2 mAbs block EC-induced raft aggregation , whereas cross-linking CD2 promotes aggregation .
These data are consistent with the critical role of CD2 in organizing the T cell-APC contact zone .
kappa opioid receptors in human microglia downregulate human immunodeficiency virus 1 expression.
Microglial cells , the resident macrophages of the brain , play an important role in the neuropathogenesis of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 ( HIV-1 ) , and recent studies suggest that opioid peptides regulate the function of macrophages from somatic tissues .
We report herein the presence of kappa opioid receptors ( KORs ) in human fetal microglia and inhibition of HIV-1 expression in acutely infected microglial cell cultures treated with KOR ligands .
Using reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction and sequencing analyses , we found that mRNA for the KOR was constitutively expressed in microglia and determined that the nucleotide sequence of the open reading frame was identical to that of the human brain KOR gene .
The expression of KOR in microglial cells was confirmed by membrane binding of ( 3H ) U69 ,593 , a kappa-selective ligand , and by indirect immunofluorescence .
Treatment of microglial cell cultures with U50 ,488 or U69 ,593 resulted in a dose-dependent inhibition of expression of the monocytotropic HIV-1 SF162 strain .
This antiviral effect of the kappa ligands was blocked by the specific KOR antagonist , nor-binaltrophimine .
These findings suggest that kappa opioid agonists have immunomodulatory activity in the brain , and that these compounds could have potential in the treatment of HIV-1-associated encephalopathy .
A novel human serine-threonine phosphatase related to the Drosophila retinal degeneration C (rdgC) gene is selectively expressed in sensory neurons of neural crest origin.
Through our transcriptional mapping effort in the Xp22 region , we have isolated by exon trapping a new transcript highly homologous to the Drosophila retinal degeneration C ( rdgC ) gene .
rdgC encodes a serine\/threonine phosphatase protein and is required in Drosophila to prevent light-induced retinal degeneration .
This human gene is the first mammalian member of the serine-threonine phosphatase with EF hand motif gene family , and was thus named PPEF ( Protein Phosphatase with EF calcium-binding domain ) .
The expression pattern of the mouse Ppef gene was studied by RNA in situ hybridization on embryonic tissue sections .
While rdgC is expressed in the visual system of the fly , as well as in the mushroom bodies of the central brain , we found that Ppef is highly expressed in sensory neurons of the dorsal root ganglia ( DRG ) and neural crest-derived cranial ganglia .
The selective pattern of expression makes PPEF an important marker for sensory neuron differentiation and suggests a role for serine-threonine phosphatases in mammalian development .
Cloning of human cDNAs encoding mitochondrial and cytosolic serine hydroxymethyltransferases and chromosomal localization.
Human cDNAs for cytosolic and mitochondrial serine hydroxymethyltransferase ( SHMT ) were cloned by functional complementation of an Escherichia coli glyA mutant with a human cDNA library .
The cDNA for the cytosolic enzyme encodes a 483-residue protein of M ( r ) 53,020 .
The cDNA for the mitochondrial enzyme encodes a mature protein of 474 residues of M ( r ) 52,400 .
The deduced protein sequences share a high degree of sequence identity to each other ( 63 % ) , and the individual isozymes are highly homologous to the analogous rabbit liver cytosolic ( 92 % identity ) and mitochondrial ( 97 % identity ) SHMT isozymes ( Martini , F. , Angelaccio , S. , Pascarella , S. , Barra , D. , Bossa , F. , and Schirch , V. ( 1987 ) J. Biol .
Chem .
262 , 5499-5509 ; Martini , F. , Maras , B. , Tanci , P. , Angelaccio , S. , Pascarella , S. , Barra , D. , Bossa , F. , and Schirch , V. ( 1989 ) J. Biol .
Chem .
264 , 8509-8519 ) .
SHMT is a highly conserved protein with the human isozymes retaining about 43 % sequence identity with the E. coli protein .
The human cytosolic and mitochondrial SHMT genes were localized to chromosome regions 17p11 .2 and 12q13 , respectively .
The high degree of nucleotide sequence identity between the two isozymes , and the presence of keratin genes in both chromosomal regions , is consistent with these regions of chromosome 12 and 17 arising by a duplication event .
Molecular characterization of an aquaporin cDNA from brain: candidate osmoreceptor and regulator of water balance.
The aquaporins transport water through membranes of numerous tissues , but the molecular mechanisms for sensing changes in extracellular osmolality and regulating water balance in brain are unknown .
We have isolated a brain aquaporin by homology cloning .
Like aquaporin 1 ( AQP1 , also known as CHIP , channel-forming integral membrane protein of 28 kDa ) , the deduced polypeptide has six putative transmembrane domains but lacks cysteines at the known mercury-sensitive sites .
Two initiation sites were identified encoding polypeptides of 301 and 323 amino acids ; expression of each in Xenopus oocytes conferred a 20-fold increase in osmotic water permeability not blocked by 1 mM HgCl2 , even after substitution of cysteine at the predicted mercury-sensitive site .
Northern analysis and RNase protection demonstrated the mRNA to be abundant in mature rat brain but only weakly detectable in eye , kidney , intestine , and lung .
In situ hybridization of brain localized the mRNA to ependymal cells lining the aqueduct , glial cells forming the edge of the cerebral cortex and brainstem , vasopressin-secretory neurons in supraoptic and paraventricular nuclei of hypothalamus , and Purkinje cells of cerebellum .
Its distinctive expression pattern implicates this fourth mammalian member of the aquaporin water channel family ( designated gene symbol , AQP4 ) as the osmoreceptor which regulates body water balance and mediates water flow within the central nervous system .
Cloning and characterisation of cDNAs encoding a novel non-receptor tyrosine kinase, brk, expressed in human breast tumours.
Using a polymerase chain reaction based differential screening approach , we have isolated and characterised a cDNA from a human metastatic breast tumor representing a novel protein tyrosine kinase ( brk ) .
Sequencing of brk cDNAs isolated from T-47D and MCF-7 human breast tumor cell lines indicate that they encode a protein with the features of a novel nonreceptor tyrosine kinase , including amino terminal SH3 and SH2 domains .
When synthesised in recombinant baculovirus and bacterial expression systems , brk protein products are capable of autophosphorylation on tyrosine residues .
Initial expression studies have detected low levels of brk transcripts in some human breast tumors and breast tumor cell lines , but not in normal breast tissue .
Regulation of human separase by securin binding and autocleavage.
BACKGROUND : Sister chromatid separation is initiated by separase , a protease that cleaves cohesin and thereby dissolves sister chromatid cohesion .
Separase is activated by the degradation of its inhibitor securin and by the removal of inhibitory phosphates .
In human cells , separase activation also coincides with the cleavage of separase , but it is not known if this reaction activates separase , which protease cleaves separase , and how separase cleavage is regulated .
RESULTS : Inhibition of separase expression in human cells by RNA interference causes the formation of polyploid cells with large lobed nuclei .
In mitosis , many of these cells contain abnormal chromosome plates with unseparated sister chromatids .
Inhibitor binding experiments in vitro reveal that securin prevents the access of substrate analogs to the active site of separase .
Upon securin degradation , the active site of full-length separase becomes accessible , allowing rapid autocatalytic cleavage of separase at one of three sites .
The resulting N - and C-terminal fragments remain associated and can be reinhibited by securin .
A noncleavable separase mutant retains its ability to cleave cohesin in vitro .
CONCLUSIONS : Our results suggest that separase is required for sister chromatid separation during mitosis in human cells .
Our data further indicate that securin inhibits separase by blocking the access of substrates to the active site of separase .
Securin proteolysis allows autocatalytic processing of separase into a cleaved form , but separase cleavage is not essential for separase activation .
Interaction of papillomavirus E6 oncoproteins with a putative calcium-binding protein.
Human papillomaviruses ( HPVs ) are associated with the majority of cervical cancers and encode a transforming protein , E6 , that interacts with the tumor suppressor protein p53 .
Because E6 has p53-independent transforming activity , the yeast two-hybrid system was used to search for other E6-binding proteins .
One such protein , E6BP , interacted with cancer-associated HPV E6 and with bovine papillomavirus type 1 ( BPV-1 ) E6 .
The transforming activity of BPV-1 E6 mutants correlated with their E6BP-binding ability .
E6BP is identical to a putative calcium-binding protein , ERC-55 , that appears to be localized in the endoplasmic reticulum .
Cutting edge: immature dendritic cells generated from monocytes in the presence of TGF-beta 1 express functional C-C chemokine receptor 6.
Although CD34 + progenitor-derived immature dendritic cells ( DCs ) express CCR6 , several recent studies reported that monocyte-derived immature DCs do not do so .
We observed that DCs generated from monocytes in the presence of GM-CSF , IL-4 , and TGF-beta 1 consistently responded to liver and activation-regulated chemokine ( LARC , also known as macrophage inflammatory protein-3 alpha ) .
These immature DCs expressed one class of high-affinity binding sites for LARC , and expressed both CCR6 mRNA and protein .
Therefore , LARC-CCR6 interaction presumably also contributes to the regulation of trafficking of monocyte-derived DCs , and utilization of TGF-beta can potentially provide a ready source of CCR6 + monocyte-derived DCs for therapeutic purposes .
The human E48 antigen, highly homologous to the murine Ly-6 antigen ThB, is a GPI-anchored molecule apparently involved in keratinocyte cell-cell adhesion.
The E48 antigen , a putative human homolog of the 20-kD protein present in desmosomal preparations of bovine muzzle , and formerly called desmoglein III ( dg4 ) , is a promising target antigen for antibody-based therapy of squamous cell carcinoma in man .
To anticipate the effect of high antibody dose treatment , and to evaluate the possible biological involvement of the antigen in carcinogenesis , we set out to molecularly characterize the antigen .
A cDNA clone encoding the E48 antigen was isolated by expression cloning in COS cells .
Sequence analysis revealed that the clone contained an open reading frame of 128 amino acids , encoding a core protein of 13,286 kD .
Database searching showed that the E48 antigen has a high level of sequence similarity with the mouse ThB antigen , a member of the Ly-6 antigen family .
Phosphatidylinositol-specific ( PI-specific ) phospholipase-C treatment indicated that the E48 antigen is glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored ( GPI-anchored ) to the plasma membrane .
The gene encoding the E48 antigen is a single copy gene , located on human chromosome 8 in the 8q24-qter region .
The expression of the gene is confined to keratinocytes and squamous tumor cells .
The putative mouse homolog , the ThB antigen , originally identified as an antigen on cells of the lymphocyte lineage , was shown to be highly expressed in squamous mouse epithelia .
Moreover , the ThB expression level is in keratinocytes , in contrast to that in lymphocytes , not mouse strain related .
Transfection of mouse SV40-polyoma transformed mouse NIH\/3T3 cells with the E48 cDNA confirmed that the antigen is likely to be involved in cell-cell adhesion .
Cloning, expression and chromosomal localization of a new putative receptor-like protein tyrosine phosphatase.
We have isolated a mouse cDNA of 5.7 kb , encoding a new member of the family of receptor-like protein tyrosine phosphatases , termed mRPTP mu .
The cDNA predicts a protein of 1432 amino acids ( not including signal peptide ) with a calculated Mr of 161,636 .
In addition , we have cloned the human homolog , hRPTP mu , which shows 98.7 % amino acid identity to mRPTP mu .
The predicted mRPTP mu protein consists of a 722 amino acid extracellular region , containing 13 potential N-glycosylation sites , a single transmembrane domain and a 688 amino acid intracellular part containing 2 tandem repeats homologous to the catalytic domains of other tyrosine phosphatases .
The N-terminal extracellular part contains a region of about 170 amino acids with no sequence similarities to known proteins , followed by one Ig-like domain and 4 fibronectin type III-like domains .
The intracellular part is unique in that the region between the transmembrane domain and the first catalytic domain is about twice as large as in other receptor-like protein tyrosine phosphatases .
RNA blot analysis reveals a single transcript , that is most abundant in lung and present in much lower amounts in brain and heart .
Transfection of the mRPTP mu cDNA into COS cells results in the synthesis of a protein with an apparent Mr of 195,000 , as detected in immunoblots using an antipeptide antibody .
The human RPTP mu gene is localized on chromosome 18pter-q11 , a region with frequent abnormalities implicated in human cancer .
Functional expression of a novel human neurokinin-3 receptor homolog that binds [3H]senktide and [125I-MePhe7]neurokinin B, and is responsive to tachykinin peptide agonists.
In 1992 , Xie et al .
identified a cDNA sequence in the expression cloning search for the kappa opioid receptor .
When the cDNA was expressed in Cos-7 cells , binding of opioid compounds was observed to be of low affinity and without kappa , mu , or delta selectivity ( Xie , G.-X .
, Miyajima , A. and Goldstein , A. ( 1992 ) Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA 89 , 4124-4128 ) .
This cDNA was highly homologous to the human neurokinin-3 ( NK-3 ) receptor sequence , and displayed lower homology to NK-1 and NK-2 sequences .
This sequence was stably expressed in Chinese hamster ovary cells , which do not express neurokinin receptors naturally , and ligand binding and second messenger characteristics were compared with a human NK-3 receptor .
The NK-3 receptor homolog bound ( 3H ) senktide with a Kd of 39 nM , similar to that of the NK-3 receptor .
The rank order of tachykinin peptides competing for ( 3H ) senktide binding at the NK-3 receptor homolog was ( MePhe7 ) neurokinin B ) senktide ) substance P = neurokinin A ) neurokinin B. This cell line also bound ( 125I-MePhe7 ) neurokinin B ; however , neurokinin B was an effective competitor .
Tachykinin peptides stimulated both inositol phospholipid hydrolysis and arachidonic acid release at NK-3 and NK-3 receptor homolog cell lines , with similar rank orders of potency of ( MePhe7 ) neurokinin B = neurokinin B = senktide ) NKA = substance P. These results indicate that expression of the NK-3 receptor homolog cDNA in the Chinese hamster ovary cell system induces the expression of a receptor site with many similarities but certain key differences from that of the human NK-3 receptor .
The results are discussed with reference to the existence of a novel human tachykinin receptor .
Molecular cloning of two rat Na+/Pi cotransporters: evidence for differential tissue expression of transcripts.
Recently , Na + \/ Pi cotransport activity has been demonstrated in rat liver hepatocytes .
Here , we report the isolation of two Na + \/ Pi cotransporter cDNAs ( RNaPi-1a and RNaPi-1b ) from a rat liver cDNA library .
The two cDNAs have the same coding but different 5 ' - untranslated regions .
The rat cDNAs encode a polypeptide of 465 amino acids , having 62 % and 66 % identity with the rabbit NaPi-1 and human kidney Na + \/ Pi cotransporter , respectively .
Northern blot analysis showed that a RNaPi-1a -- specific probe detected two major transcripts ( 2.3 and 1.8 kb ) , whereas a RNaPi-1b -- specific probe hybridized with one transcript ( 1.8 kb ) in rat kidney , liver , and hepatocytes in primary culture .
Rat liver expressed much higher levels of RNaPi-1a than RNaPi-1b , whereas the converse was true for rat kidney .
Low levels of RNaPi-1 mRNAs were also detected in rat heart , brain , and skeletal muscle .
These findings indicate that there are at least two isoforms of RNaPi-1 transcripts expressed in liver and kidney and that the levels of expression of the RNaPi-1a and RNaPi-1b may be controlled by tissue-specific factors .
Expression and kinetic characterization of recombinant human stomach alcohol dehydrogenase. Active-site amino acid sequence explains substrate specificity compared with liver isozymes.
A full-length 1966-base pair clone of the human class IV alcohol dehydrogenase ( sigma-ADH ) was isolated from a human stomach cDNA library .
The 373-amino acid sigma-ADH encoded by this cDNA was expressed in Escherichia coli .
The specific activity of the recombinant enzyme for ethanol oxidation at pH 7.5 and 25 degrees C , calculated from active-site titration of NADH binding , was 92 + \/ - 9 units\/mg .
Kinetic analysis of the catalytic efficiency ( kcat\/KM ) of recombinant sigma-ADH for oxidation of primary alcohols indicated broad substrate specificity .
Recombinant human sigma-ADH exhibited high catalytic efficiency for oxidation of all-trans-retinol to all-trans-retinal .
This pathway is important in the synthesis of the transcriptional regulator all-trans-retinoic acid .
Secondary alcohols and 3 beta-hydroxysteroids were inactive with sigma-ADH or were oxidized with very low efficiency .
The KM of sigma-ADH for ethanol was 25 mM , and the KM for primary straight chain alcohols decreased substantially as chain length increased .
There are important amino acid differences in the alcohol-binding site between the human class IV ( sigma ) and human class I ( beta ) alcohol dehydrogenases that appear to explain the high catalytic efficiency for all-trans-retinol , the high kcat for ethanol , and the low catalytic efficiency for secondary alcohols of sigma-ADH relative to beta 1-ADH .
For example , modeling the binding of all-trans-retinol in the human beta 1-ADH structure suggested that coordination of retinol to the active-site zinc is hindered by a loop from residues 114 to 120 that is at the entrance to the alcohol-binding site .
The deletion of Gly-117 in human sigma-ADH and a substitution of Leu for the bulky Tyr-110 appear to facilitate retinol access to the active-site zinc .
X-arrestin: a new retinal arrestin mapping to the X chromosome.
We have been using a differential cDNA cloning approach to isolate human retina-specific and retina-enriched genes ( 1 ) .
A 1,314 bp cDNA was isolated by this approach , representing a highly retina-specific message encoding a 388 amino acid protein showing 58 % , 50 % , and 49 % homology to bovine beta-arrestin , and bovine and human retinal arrestin ( S-antigen ) , respectively .
Chromosomal mapping localized this new arrestin gene to the proximal long arm of the X chromosome , hence it was named X-arrestin .
In situ hybridization demonstrated its expression in the inner and outer segments and the inner plexiform regions of the retina .
The eukaryotic UDP-N-acetylglucosamine pyrophosphorylases. Gene cloning, protein expression, and catalytic mechanism.
A search of the yeast data base for a protein homologous to Escherichia coli UDP-N-acetylglucosamine pyrophosphorylase yielded UAP1 ( UDP-N-acetylglucosamine pyrophosphorylase ) , the Saccharomyces cerevisiae gene for UDP-N-acetylglucosamine pyrophosphorylase .
The Candida albicans and human homologs were also cloned by screening a C. albicans genomic library and a human testis cDNA library , respectively .
Sequence analysis revealed that the human UAP1 cDNA was identical to previously reported AGX1 .
A null mutation of the S. cerevisiae UAP1 ( ScUAP1 ) gene was lethal , and when expressed under the control of ScUAP1 promoter , both C. albicans and Homo sapiens UAP1 ( CaUAP1 and HsUAP1 ) rescued the ScUAP1-deficient S. cerevisiae cells .
All the recombinant ScUap1p , CaUap1p , and HsUap1p possessed UDP-N-acetylglucosamine pyrophosphorylase activities in vitro .
The yeast Uap1p utilized N-acetylglucosamine-1-phosphate as the substrate , and together with Agm1p , it produced UDP-N-acetylglucosamine from N-acetylglucosamine-6-phosphate .
These results demonstrate that the UAP1 genes indeed specify eukaryotic UDP-GlcNAc pyrophosphorylase and that phosphomutase reaction precedes uridyltransfer .
Sequence comparison with other UDP-sugar pyrophosphorylases revealed that amino acid residues , Gly112 , Gly114 , Thr115 , Arg116 , Pro122 , and Lys123 of ScUap1p are highly conserved in UDP-sugar pyrophosphorylases reported to date .
Among these amino acids , alanine substitution for Gly112 , Arg116 , or Lys123 severely diminished the activity , suggesting that Gly112 , Arg116 , or Lys123 are possible catalytic residues of the enzyme .
XCE, a new member of the endothelin-converting enzyme and neutral endopeptidase family, is preferentially expressed in the CNS.
In the present study , we have isolated a cDNA encoding a novel member of the family of zinc metallopeptidases that includes neutral endopeptidase and endothelin-converting enzyme .
The predicted amino-acid sequence of this enzyme , termed XCE , consists of 775 amino-acids with a single putative membrane-spanning region , an N-terminal cytoplasmic domain of 59 residues , and a large luminal domain that contains a characteristic zinc-binding motif .
Western blot analysis of cells stably expressing this new metallopeptidase revealed a glycosylated protein of approximately 95 kDa .
XCE mRNA was found to be predominantly expressed in the central nervous system , sympathetic ganglia and in uterine subepithelial cells .
In the rat and human CNS , a very specific pattern of neuronal labeling ( in presumptive cholinergic interneurons of basal ganglia , basal forebrain neurons , as well as brainstem and spinal cord motoneurons ) was detected by in situ hybridization histochemistry .
The enzyme substrate , as yet unidentified , might be found among the numerous neuropeptide transmitters which are colocalized with acetylcholine in these neurons .
Isolation and sequence of a cDNA clone for human calcineurin B, the Ca2+-binding subunit of the Ca2+/calmodulin-stimulated protein phosphatase.
We have identified and cloned human cDNA for the Ca2 + - binding subunit of calcineurin , the brain isozyme of the Ca2 + \/ calmodulin-stimulated protein phosphatase .
The 2.5-kb cDNA has an open reading frame of 510 bp , a leader sequence of at least 500 bp , and a 1,277-bp 3 ' - noncoding sequence .
The deduced sequence of the human protein differs from bovine brain calcineurin B by an additional valine at the carboxyl terminus and substitution of Met-11 and Ser-153 by cysteine .
A partial clone of the mouse protein corresponding to amino acids 75-150 was also isolated .
This portion of the human and mouse protein sequence is identical , with the DNA sequences showing 94 % identity .
The respective mRNAs in human and mouse are also of similar size .
As was observed with protein levels , mRNA abundance in brain is 20-60 times that found in other tissues with the exception of HeLa cells which , like brain , contain abundant calcineurin B mRNA .
Cloning and chromosome assignment to 1q32 of a human cDNA (RAB7L1) encoding a small GTP-binding protein, a member of the RAS superfamily.
A full-length cDNA homologous to RAB7 , a member of the RAB-related GTP-binding protein subfamily , was isolated from a human placenta cDNA library .
This cDNA , designated RAB7L1 , has an open reading frame of 609 nucleotides encoding 203 amino acids .
Northern analysis showed that the mRNA is ubiquitously expressed in human tissues , although signal intensities were different among the various organs examined .
This gene was located on chromosome band 1q32 by fluorescence in situ hybridization .
Primary structure of the human melanoma-associated antigen p97 (melanotransferrin) deduced from the mRNA sequence.
p97 is a cell-surface glycoprotein that is present in most human melanomas but only in trace amounts in normal adult tissues .
To determine the structure of this tumor-associated antigen and to identify its functional domains , we have purified and cloned p97 mRNA and determined its nucleotide sequence .
The mRNA encodes a 738-residue precursor , which contains the previously determined N-terminal amino acid sequence of p97 .
After removal of a 19-residue signal peptide , the mature p97 molecule comprises extracellular domains of 342 and 352 residues and a C-terminal 25-residue stretch of predominantly uncharged and hydrophobic amino acids , which we believe acts as a membrane anchor .
Each extracellular domain contains 14 cysteine residues , which form seven intradomain disulfide bridges , and one or two potential N-glycosylation sites .
Protease digestion studies show that the three major antigenic determinants of p97 are present on the N-terminal domain .
The domains are strikingly homologous to each other ( 46 % amino acid sequence homology ) and to the corresponding domains of human serum transferrin ( 39 % homology ) .
Conservation of disulfide bridges and of amino acids thought to compose the iron binding pockets suggests that p97 is also related to transferrin in tertiary structure and function .
We propose that p97 be renamed melanotransferrin to denote its original identification in melanoma cells and its evolutionary relationship to serotransferrin and lactotransferrin , the other members of the transferrin superfamily .
Total colourblindness is caused by mutations in the gene encoding the alpha-subunit of the cone photoreceptor cGMP-gated cation channel.
Total colourblindness ( OMIM 216900 ) , also referred to as rod monochromacy ( RM ) or complete achromatopsia , is a rare , autosomal recessive inherited and congenital disorder characterized by photophobia , reduced visual acuity , nystagmus and the complete inability to discriminate between colors .
Electroretinographic recordings show that in RM , rod photoreceptor function is normal , whereas cone photoreceptor responses are absent .
The locus for RM has been mapped to chromosome 2q11 ( ref .
2 ) , however the gene underlying RM has not yet been identified .
Recently , a suitable candidate gene , CNGA3 , encoding the alpha-subunit of the cone photoreceptor cGMP-gated cation channel , a key component of the phototransduction pathway , has been cloned and assigned to human chromosome 2q11 ( refs 3,4 ) .
We report the identification of missense mutations in CNGA3 in five families with RM .
Homozygous mutations are present in two families , whereas the remaining families show compound heterozygous mutations .
In all cases , the segregation pattern of the mutations is consistent with the autosomal recessive inheritance of the disease and all mutations affect amino acids that are highly conserved among cyclic nucleotide gated channels ( CNG ) in various species .
This is the first report of a color vision disorder caused by defects other than mutations in the cone pigment genes , and implies at least in this instance a common genetic basis for phototransduction in the three different cone photoreceptors of the human retina .
ADAM10-mediated cleavage of L1 adhesion molecule at the cell surface and in released membrane vesicles.
Cells can release membrane components in a soluble form and as membrane vesicles .
L1 , an important molecule for cell migration of neural and tumor cells , is released by membrane-proximal cleavage , and soluble L1 promotes cell migration .
Release of L1 is enhanced by shedding inducers such as phorbol ester and pervanadate , but it is also enhanced by depletion of cellular cholesterol with methyl-beta-cyclodextrin ( MCD ) .
How such different compounds can induce shedding is presently unknown .
We show here that ADAM10 is involved in L1 cleavage , which occurs at the cell surface and in the Golgi apparatus .
MCD and pervanadate treatment induced the release of microvesicles containing full-length L1 and the active form of ADAM10 .
L1 cleavage occurred in isolated vesicles .
L1-containing microvesicles could trigger haptotactic cell migration .
Only the neural L1 form carrying the RSLE signal for clathrin-dependent endocytosis was recruited and cleaved in vesicles .
Phorbol ester treatment activated L1 cleavage predominantly at the cell surface .
Our results provide evidence for two pathways of L1 cleavage , based on ADAM10 localization , that can be activated differentially : 1 ) direct cleavage at the cell surface , and 2 ) release and cleavage in secretory vesicles most likely derived from the Golgi apparatus .
The findings establish a novel role for ADAM10 as a vesicle-based protease .
Contribution of CD3 gamma to TCR regulation and signaling in human mature T lymphocytes.
CD3 proteins may have redundant as well as specific contributions to the intracellular propagation and final effector responses of TCR-mediated signals at different checkpoints during T cell differentiation .
We report here on the participation of CD3 gamma in the activation and effector function of human mature T lymphocytes at the antigen recognition checkpoint .
Following TCR-CD3 engagement of human CD3 gamma-deficient T cell lines , and despite their lower TCR-CD3 surface levels compared to normal controls , mature T cell responses such as protein tyrosine phosphorylation and the regulation of expression of several cell surface molecules , including the TCR-CD3 itself , were either normal or only slightly affected .
In contrast , other physiological responses like the specific adhesion and concomitant cell polarization on ICAM-1-coated dishes were selectively defective , and activation-induced cell death was increased .
Our data indicate that CD3 gamma contributes essential specialized signaling functions to certain mature T cell responses .
Failure to generate appropriate interactions may abort cytoskeleton reorganization and initiate an apoptotic response .
Cloning and characterization of seven human forkhead proteins: binding site specificity and DNA bending.
The forkhead domain is a monomeric DNA binding motif that defines a rapidly growing family of eukaryotic transcriptional regulators .
Genetic and biochemical data suggest a central role in embryonic development for genes encoding forkhead proteins .
We have used PCR and low stringency hybridization to isolate clones from human cDNA and genomic libraries that represent seven novel forkhead genes , freac-1 to freac-7 .
The spatial patterns of expression for the seven freac genes range from specific for a single tissue to nearly ubiquitous .
The DNA binding specificities of four of the FREAC proteins were determined by selection of binding sites from random sequence oligonucleotides .
The binding sites for all four FREAC proteins share a core sequence , RTAAAYA , but differ in the positions flanking the core .
Domain swaps between two FREAC proteins identified two subregions within the forkhead domain as responsible for creating differences in DNA binding specificity .
Applying a circular permutation assay , we show that binding of FREAC proteins to their cognate sites results in bending of the DNA at an angle of 80-90 degrees .
rac, a novel ras-related family of proteins that are botulinum toxin substrates.
A new family of ras-related proteins , designated rac ( ras-related C3 botulinum toxin substrate ) has been identified .
rac1 and rac2 cDNA clones were isolated from a differentiated HL-60 library and encode proteins that are 92 % homologous and share 58 % and 26-30 % amino acid homology with human rhos and ras , respectively .
Nucleotide sequence analysis predicts both rac1 and rac2 proteins to contain 192 amino acids with molecular masses of 21,450 and 21,429 daltons , respectively .
rac1 and rac2 possess four of the five conserved functional domains in ras associated with binding and hydrolysis of guanine nucleotides .
They also contain the COOH-terminal consensus sequence Cys-X-X-X-COOH which localizes ras to the inner plasma membrane and the residues Gly12 and Ala59 , at which sites mutations elicit transforming potential to ras .
The rac transcripts , particularly rac2 , display relative myeloid tissue selectivity .
Both rac1 transcripts ( 2.4 and 1.1 kilobases ( kb ) increase when HL-60 cells differentiate to neutrophil-like morphology .
In contrast , differentiation of U937 cells to monocyte-like morphology causes no change in the 2.4-kb mRNA and a decrease in the 1.1-kb mRNA species .
rac2 mRNA ( 1.45 kb ) increases 7-9-fold and 3-fold upon differentiation of HL-60 and U937 cells , respectively .
Neither rac mRNAs are present in a Jurkat T cell line , and unlike rac1 , rac2 mRNA is absent in human brain and liver tissue .
Transfection experiments permitted the demonstration that rac1 and rac2 are substrates for ADP-ribosylation by the C3 component of botulinum toxin .
The data suggest that racs are plasma membrane-associated GTP-binding proteins which could regulate secretory processes , particularly in myeloid cells .
Human mu opiate receptor. cDNA and genomic clones, pharmacologic characterization and chromosomal assignment.
A human mu opiate receptor cDNA has been identified from a cerebral cortical cDNA library using sequences from the rat mu opiate receptor cDNA .
The human mu opiate receptor ( h mu OR1 ) shares 95 % amino acid identity with the rat sequence .
The expressed mu OR1 recognized tested opiate drugs and opioid peptides in a sodium - and GTP-sensitive fashion with affinities virtually identical to those displayed by the rat mu opiate receptor .
Effects on cyclic AMP are similar to those noted for the rat mu opiate receptor .
An 18 kb genomic clone hybridizing with the h mu OR1 cDNA contains 63 and 489 bp exonic sequences flanked by splice donor\/acceptor sequences .
Analysis of hybridization to DNA prepared from human rodent hybrid cell lines and chromosomal in situ hybridization studies indicate localization to 6q24-25 .
An MspI polymorphism , producing a 3.7 kb band , may prove useful in assessing this gene 's involvement in neuropsychiatric disorders involving opiatergic systems .
The IFN-inducible nucleoprotein IFI 16 is expressed in cells of the monocyte lineage, but is rapidly and markedly down-regulated in other myeloid precursor populations.
IFI 16 is an interferon-inducible nucleoprotein expressed by human monocytes .
IFI 16 and a related mouse protein , p202 , control cellular proliferation by binding and modulating the functions of cell cycle regulatory factors including p53 and the retinoblastoma gene product , pRb .
In this study , we examined IFI 16 expression in myeloid precursor cells cultured in vitro in colony-forming assays using granulocyte ( G - ) and granulocyte-macrophage ( GM - ) colony-stimulating factor ( CSF ) .
IFI 16 was expressed in 100 % of CD34 + cells isolated from human bone marrow .
When the CD34 + cells were induced to differentiate , two sub-populations of cells were identified by two-color cytofluorography : the CD14 + ( monocytoid ) cells all expressed IFI 16 , whereas the CD14 - ( polymorphonuclear precursor ) cells did not .
The strongest expression of IFI 16 was in the cells staining brightest for CD14 , whereas depletion of CD14 + monocytoid cells from mixed monocytic\/granulocytic cultures largely abolished IFI 16-stained cells .
Furthermore , in eight independent colony-forming assays , the number of IFI 16 + cells correlated closely with the numbers of monocyte precursors identified morphologically ( R2 = 0.99 ) , but was unrelated to the numbers of myelocytes , promyelocytes , and metamyelocytes ; nor was IFI 16 expressed by erythroid or eosinophil precursors .
We conclude that IFI 16 is expressed in CD34 + and monocytoid daughter cells , but is rapidly and markedly down-regulated at the corresponding stages of polymorphonuclear and erythroid development .
This differential expression of IFI 16 in myeloid precursor subpopulations and its perceived molecular properties are consistent with a possible role in regulating myelopoiesis .
Neutrophil polarity and locomotion are associated with surface redistribution of leukosialin (CD43), an antiadhesive membrane molecule.
This study analyzed the behavior of an antiadhesive membrane molecule , CD43 , in neutrophil polarization and locomotion .
CD43 cross-linking by antibodies induced neutrophil locomotion , with CD43 molecules clustered at the uropod of polarized neutrophils .
In contrast , CD11b\/CD18 cross-linking by antibodies did not affect either cell polarization or locomotion .
Stimulation of suspended or adherent neutrophils with chemotactic peptide results in cell polarization and locomotion and a concomitant redistribution of CD43 to the uropod .
This process is entirely reversible .
The study also investigated which actin-binding protein could be involved in CD43 lateral redistribution .
alpha-Actinin and moesin are preferentially adsorbed on Sepharose beads bearing a recombinant CD43 intracellular domain .
Analysis by immunofluorescence confocal microscopy shows a codistribution of moesin during CD43 lateral redistribution .
By contrast , alpha-actinin is located at the leading edge , an area devoid of CD43 .
These results shed new light on the role of CD43 membrane redistribution , which appears to be directly related to neutrophil polarity and locomotion .
( Blood .
2000 ; 95:2462 -2470 )
Expression of the receptor protein tyrosine kinase myk-1/htk in normal and malignant mammary epithelium.
We have recently reported the molecular characterization of a novel murine receptor PTK ( myk-1 ) , belonging to the eph-related family , whose expression was differentially regulated during mammary gland development and elevated in invasive mouse mammary tumors .
In this communication we have investigated the cellular origin of myk-1 expression by in situ hybridisation and RNase protection .
Murine antisense myk-1 probe specifically recognized ductal and alveolar epithelium in the resting mouse mammary gland .
In normal human breast , the expression of htk , the human homolog , was also confined to the secretory luminal epithelial cells .
RNase protection analysis of enriched luminal and myoepithelial cells prepared from human reduction mammoplasty tissue confirmed the luminal specificity .
Elevated expression of htk was found in several human breast carcinoma cell lines as well as in primary , high grade , infiltrating , ductal carcinomas of the breast .
The specific epithelial expression of the myk-1 \/ htk receptor PTK suggest a specialised role of this eph-related PTK in the differentiation and\/or maintenance of secretory epithelium in the adult .
Cloning and expression of a cell surface receptor for advanced glycosylation end products of proteins.
Advanced glycosylation end products of proteins ( AGEs ) are nonenzymatically glycosylated proteins which accumulate in vascular tissue in aging and at an accelerated rate in diabetes .
A approximately 35-kDa polypeptide with a unique NH2-terminal sequence has been isolated from bovine lung and found to be present on the surface of endothelial cells where it mediates the binding of AGEs ( receptor for advanced glycosylation end product or RAGE ) .
Using an oligonucleotide probe based on the amino-terminal sequence of RAGE , an apparently full-length cDNA of 1.5 kilobases was isolated from a bovine lung cDNA library .
This cDNA encoded a 394 amino acid mature protein comprised of the following putative domains : an extracellular domain of 332 amino acids , a single hydrophobic membrane spanning domain of 19 amino acids , and a carboxyl-terminal domain of 43 amino acids .
A partial clone encoding the human counterpart of RAGE , isolated from a human lung library , was found to be approximately 90 % homologous to the bovine molecule .
Based on computer analysis of the amino acid sequence of RAGE and comparison with databases , RAGE is a new member of the immunoglobulin superfamily of cell surface molecules and shares significant homology with MUC 18 , NCAM , and the cytoplasmic domain of CD20 .
Expression of the RAGE cDNA in 293 cells allowed them to bind 125I-AGE-albumin in a saturable and dose-dependent manner ( Kd approximately 100 nM ) , blocked by antibody to RAGE .
Western blots of 293 cells transfected with RAGE cDNA probed with anti-RAGE IgG demonstrated expression of immunoreactive protein compared to its absence in mock-transfected cells .
These results suggest that RAGE functions as a cell surface receptor for AGEs , which could potentially mediate cellular effects of this class of glycosylated proteins .
In its active form, the GTP-binding protein rab8 interacts with a stress-activated protein kinase.
Rab8 is a small GTP-binding protein that plays a role in vesicular transport from the trans-Golgi network to the basolateral plasma membrane in polarized epithelial cells ( MDCK ) , and to the dendritic surface in hippocampal neurons .
As is the case for most other rab proteins , the precise molecular interactions by which rab8 carries out its function remain to be elucidated .
Here we report the identification and the complete cDNA-derived amino acid sequence of a murine rab8-interacting protein ( rab8ip ) that specifically interacts with rab8 in a GTP-dependent manner .
Rab8ip displays 93 % identity with the GC kinase , a serine\/threonine protein kinase recently identified in human lymphoid tissue that is activated in the stress response .
Like the GC kinase , rab8ip has protein kinase activity manifested by autophosphorylation and phosphorylation of the classical serine\/threonine protein kinase substrates , myelin basic protein and casein .
When coexpressed in transfected 293T cells , rab8 and the rab8ip\/GC kinase formed a complex that could be recovered by immunoprecipitation with antibodies to rab8 .
Cell fractionation and immunofluorescence analyses indicate that in MDCK cells endogenous rab8ip is present both in the cytosol and as a peripheral membrane protein concentrated in the Golgi region and basolateral plasma membrane domains , sites where rab8 itself is also located .
In light of recent evidence that rab proteins may act by promoting the stabilization of SNARE complexes , the specific GTP-dependent association of rab8 with the rab8ip\/GC kinase raises the possibility that rab-regulated protein phosphorylation is important for vesicle targeting or fusion .
Moreover , the rab8ip\/GC kinase may serve to modulate secretion in response to stress stimuli .
Molecular cloning, sequencing, and functional expression of a cDNA encoding human coproporphyrinogen oxidase.
Coproporphyrinogen oxidase ( EC 1.3.3.3 ) catalyzes the sixth step in the heme biosynthetic pathway , the oxidation of coproporphyrinogen III to protoporphyrinogen IX .
The activity of this enzyme is deficient in the disease hereditary coproporphyria .
The sequence of the cDNA and predicted amino acid sequence of the human coproporphyrinogen oxidase are presented .
The human protein sequence contains a region completely homologous to that we obtained by sequencing an 11-amino acid peptide fragment from purified murine liver coproporphyrinogen oxidase .
Results of Southern blotting were consistent with the presence of a single human coproporphyrinogen oxidase gene , and Northern blotting demonstrated one transcript of similar size in erythroid and nonerythroid cell lines .
Expression of the cDNA coding for the putative mature human coproporphyrinogen oxidase in Escherichia coli resulted in a 17-fold increase in coproporphyrinogen activity over endogenous activity .
Characterization of VPS41, a gene required for vacuolar trafficking and high-affinity iron transport in yeast.
Mutations in the yeast gene VPS41 give rise to poor growth on low iron medium , severe alterations in vacuolar morphology , and cause the missorting of membranous and soluble vacuolar proteins .
Our studies predict that VPS41 encodes a hydrophilic protein of 992 amino acids that contains no obvious signal sequence or hydrophobic domains .
The deduced Vps41p sequence contains a domain rich in glutamic and aspartic residues , as well as a domain with resemblance to a region of clathrin heavy chain .
We have also identified and sequenced putative VPS41 homologs from Caenorhabditis elegans , plants , and humans .
The VPS41 homologs ( but not the yeast VPS41 itself ) contain a conserved cysteine-rich RING-H2 zinc finger at their COOH termini .
Biochemical experiments suggest that VPS41 functions in post-Golgi protein processing : the deletion mutant exhibits defective high affinity transport due to impaired Fet3p activity and also exhibits defects in the processing and sorting of multiple vacuolar hydrolases .
Human creatine kinase: isolation and sequence analysis of cDNA clones for the B subunit, development of subunit specific probes and determination of gene copy number.
cDNA clones for human B creatine kinase were isolated from human brain and placenta libraries .
The entire coding and 3 ' untranslated regions , as well as 23 bp of the 5 ' untranslated region were sequenced .
Complete sequence identity was found among the clones , with the exception of an area of heterogeneity among the 3 ' untranslated region of the brain and placenta clones .
A 77.7 % nucleotide sequence identity was found between the coding region of human B creatine kinase and our previously reported human M creatine kinase .
In contrast , no homology was found in the 3 ' untranslated regions .
Probes were constructed from the nonconserved 3 ' untranslated regions of human M and B creatine kinase and were shown to be highly specific .
Southern transfers of total genomic DNA derived from human placenta and digested to completion with several restriction enzymes were probed with the MCK and BCK specific probes producing single hybridization bands .
These results suggest that creatine kinase M and B are single copy genes in the human genome .
A nuclear protein, synthesized in growth-arrested human hepatoblastoma cells, is a novel member of the short-chain alcohol dehydrogenase family.
We have described a protein ( Hep27 ) ( Donadel , G. , Garzelli , C. , Frank , R. & Gabrielli , F. ( 1991 ) Eur .
J. Biochem .
195 , 723-729 ) which is synthesized and accumulated in the nucleus of human hepatoblastoma ( HepG2 ) cells , following growth arrest induced by butyrate treatment .
The synthesis of Hep27 is inhibited in cells that , released from the butyrate block , have resumed DNA synthesis .
This report describes the cloning and the characterization of the cDNA coding for the Hep27 protein .
The translation of the Hep27 cDNA predicts an amino acid sequence that can be aligned with those of the known short-chain alcohol dehydrogenase enzymes ( SCAD ) family .
Both the recognition of enzymic functional domains and the similarity with the SCAD family of proteins of several amino acid blocks throughout the molecule , strongly suggest that this protein is a new member of the SCAD family .
In agreement with its nuclear localization Hep27 has a region similar to the bipartite nuclear-targeting sequence .
The study of Hep27 mRNA expression and protein synthesis suggests the existence of a regulation at the post-transcriptional level .
The possible nuclear role of the Hep27 protein is discussed .
A tissue-specific MAR/SAR DNA-binding protein with unusual binding site recognition.
A human cDNA was cloned that encodes a DNA-binding protein ( SATB1 ) that is expressed predominantly in thymus and binds selectively to the nuclear matrix\/scaffold-associating DNAs ( MARs\/SARs ) .
Missing nucleoside experiments showed that SATB1 selectively binds in a special AT-rich sequence context where one strand consists of mixed A 's , T 's , and C 's , excluding G 's ( ATC sequences ) .
When this feature is destroyed by mutation , SATB1 binding is greatly reduced even if the direct contact sequence remains intact .
Conjunctional SATB1-binding sequences become stably unpaired in supercoiled DNA .
Specific mutations that diminish the unwinding potential greatly reduce SATB1 binding .
However , SATB1 does not bind single-stranded DNA .
Chemical interference assays show that SATB1 binds along the minor groove with very little contact with the bases .
This suggests that SATB1 recognizes the ATC sequence indirectly through the altered sugar-phosphate backbone structure present in the double-stranded DNA .
A novel mammalian protein, p55CDC, present in dividing cells is associated with protein kinase activity and has homology to the Saccharomyces cerevisiae cell division cycle proteins Cdc20 and Cdc4.
A novel protein , p55CDC , has been identified in cycling mammalian cells .
This transcript is readily detectable in all exponentially growing cell lines but disappears when cells are chemically induced to fall out of the cell cycle and differentiate .
The p55CDC protein appears to be essential for cell division , since transfection of antisense p55CDC cDNA into CHO cells resulted in isolation of only those cells which exhibited a compensatory increase in p55CDC transcripts in the sense orientation .
Immunoprecipitation of p55CDC yielded protein complexes with kinase activity which fluctuated during the cell cycle .
Since p55CDC does not have the conserved protein kinase domains , this activity must be due to one or more of the associated proteins in the immune complex .
The highest levels of protein kinase activity were seen with alpha-casein and myelin basic protein as substrates and demonstrated a pattern of activity distinct from that described for the known cyclin-dependent cell division kinases .
The p55CDC protein was also phosphorylated in dividing cells .
The amino acid sequence of p55CDC contains seven repeats homologous to the beta subunit of G proteins , and the highest degree of homology in these repeats was found with the Saccharomyces cerevisiae Cdc20 and Cdc4 proteins , which have been proposed to be involved in the formation of a functional bipolar mitotic spindle in yeast cells .
The G beta repeat has been postulated to mediate protein-protein interactions and , in p55CDC , may modulate its association with a unique cell cycle protein kinase .
These findings suggest that p55CDC is a component of the mammalian cell cycle mechanism .
Molecular mechanism for an inherited cardiac arrhythmia.
In the congenital long-QT syndrome , prolongation of the cardiac action potential occurs by an unknown mechanism and predisposes individuals to syncope and sudden death as a result of ventricular arrhythmias .
Genetic heterogeneity has been demonstrated for autosomal dominant long-QT syndrome by the identification of multiple distinct loci , and associated mutations in two candidate genes have recently been reported .
One form of hereditary long QT ( LQT3 ) has been linked to a mutation in the gene encoding the human heart voltage-gated sodium-channel alpha-subunit ( SCN5A on chromosome 3p21 ) .
Here we characterize this mutation using heterologous expression of recombinant human heart sodium channels .
Mutant channels show a sustained inward current during membrane depolarization .
Single-channel recordings indicate that mutant channels fluctuate between normal and non-inactivating gating modes .
Persistent inward sodium current explains prolongation of cardiac action potentials , and provides a molecular mechanism for this form of congenital long-QT syndrome .
Purification, cloning, and characterization of a human coactivator, PC4, that mediates transcriptional activation of class II genes.
Activator-dependent transcription in mammalian cells requires upstream stimulatory activity ( USA ) - derived cofactors in addition to those present in TFIID .
A novel positive cofactor ( PC4 ) purified from the human USA fraction effected a marked enhancement ( up to 85-fold ) of GAL4-AH-dependent transcription in conjunction with TFIID and other general factors .
Isolation of a corresponding cDNA identified PC4 as a 127 residue single-stranded DNA-binding protein with serine-rich regions near the N-terminus .
Recombinant PC4 was functionally equivalent to native PC4 , and both proteins markedly enhanced activation by diverse activation domains fused to the DNA-binding domain of GAL4 .
Recombinant PC4 interacted independently both with free or DNA-bound VP16 activation domains and with free or DNA-bound TFIIA-TBP complexes ( but not with TBP alone ) .
These results indicate that PC4 is a general coactivator that functions cooperatively with TAFs and mediates functional interactions between upstream activators and the general transcriptional machinery .
Expression cloning of a human Fc receptor for IgA.
IgA , the predominant isotype in secretions , mediates the neutralization and removal of environmental antigens from mucosal sites .
Although cell surface receptors for the Fc region of IgA ( Fc alpha R ) have been implicated in a variety of immune effector mechanisms , the molecular features of Fc alpha R remain only marginally characterized .
In this report , we describe the isolation of a clone from a myeloid cell line cDNA library that directs the expression of a cell surface molecule with IgA binding specificity .
The cDNA encodes a peptide of Mr 30,000 including a putative transmembrane region with features atypical of conventional membrane-anchored proteins .
Databank searches indicate that the human myeloid cell Fc alpha R sequence is unique , is a member of the immunoglobulin gene superfamily , and is related to Fc receptors for IgG ( Fc gamma RI , II , and III ) and IgE ( Fc epsilon RI ) .
cDNA cloning and functional analysis of the p97 subunit of the 26S proteasome, a polypeptide identical to the type-1 tumor-necrosis-factor-receptor-associated protein-2/55.11.
Molecular cloning of cDNA for a new regulatory subunit , designated p97 , of the human 26S proteasome showed that the polypeptide consists of 908 amino acid residues with a calculated molecular mass of 100184 Da and an isoelectric point of 4.94 .
Computer analysis showed that p97 is very similar to type-1 tumor-necrosis-factor ( TNF ) - receptor-associated protein ( TRAP ) -2 and 55.11 , both of which were identified recently as binding proteins of the cytoplasmic domain of type-1 TNF receptor by yeast two-hybrid screening .
This finding suggests that the 26S proteasome might serve as a mediator molecule in the TNF signaling pathway in cells .
Computer-assisted similarity analysis also revealed the high sequence similarity of p97 with a yeast protein whose function is yet unknown , the gene for which is here termed NAS1 ( non-ATPase subunit 1 ) .
Disruption of NAS1 resulted in several phenotypes , including lethality and temperature-sensitive growth , depending on the genetic background of the cells used .
The human p97 cDNA suppressed the growth defect of nas1 disruptant cells , when expressed from single-copy or multi-copy vectors , indicating that p97 is functionally equivalent to yeast Nas1p .
Culturing of the temperature-sensitive nas1 cells at the restrictive temperature promoted the accumulation polyubiquitinated cellular proteins , implying that the 26S proteasome requires a functional Nas1p subunit for ubiquitin-dependent proteolysis .
These results indicate that p97\/Nas1p plays an important regulatory role in the function of the 26S proteasome .
Cloning and characterization of a cellular apoptosis susceptibility gene, the human homologue to the yeast chromosome segregation gene CSE1.
We recently isolated human cDNA fragments that render MCF-7 breast cancer cells resistant to cell death caused by Pseudomonas exotoxin , Pseudomonas exotoxin-derived immunotoxins , diphtheria toxin , and tumor necrosis factor .
We report here that one of these fragments is an antisense fragment of a gene homologous to the essential yeast chromosome segregation gene CSE1 .
Cloning and analysis of the full-length cDNA of the human CSE1 homolog , which we name CAS for cellular apoptosis susceptibility gene , reveals a protein coding region with similar length ( 971 amino acids for CAS , 960 amino acids for CSE1 ) and 59 % overall protein homology to the yeast CSE1 protein .
The conservation of this gene indicates it has an important function in human cells consistent with the essential role of CSE1 in yeast .
CAS is highly expressed in human tumor cell lines and in human testis and fetal liver , tissues that contain actively dividing cells .
Furthermore , CAS expression increases when resting human fibroblasts are induced to proliferate and decreases when they are growth-arrested .
Thus , CAS appears to play an important role in both toxin and tumor necrosis factor-mediated cell death , as well as in cell proliferation .
Non-histone chromosomal proteins HMG1 and 2 enhance ligation reaction of DNA double-strand breaks.
DNA ligase IV in a complex with XRCC4 is responsible for DNA end-joining in repair of DNA double-strand breaks ( DSB ) and V ( D ) J recombination .
We found that non-histone chromosomal high mobility group ( HMG ) proteins 1 and 2 enhanced the ligation of linearized pUC119 DNA with DNA ligase IV from rat liver nuclear extract .
Intra-molecular and inter-molecular ligations of cohesive-ended and blunt-ended DNA were markedly stimulated by HMG1 and 2 .
Recombinant HMG2-domain A , B , and ( A + B ) polypeptides were similarly , but non-identically , effective for the stimulation of DSB ligation reaction .
Ligation of single-strand breaks ( nicks ) was only slightly activated by the HMG proteins .
The DNA end-binding Ku protein singly or in combination with the catalytic component of DNA-dependent protein kinase ( DNA-PK ) as the DNA-PK holoenzyme was ineffective for the ligation of linearized pUC119 DNA .
Although the stimulatory effect of HMG1 and 2 on ligation of DSB in vitro was not specific to DNA ligase IV , these results suggest that HMG1 and 2 are involved in the final ligation step in DNA end-joining processes of DSB repair and V ( D ) J recombination .
Role of Mxi1 in ageing organ systems and the regulation of normal and neoplastic growth.
Mxi1 belongs to the Mad ( Mxi1 ) family of proteins , which function as potent antagonists of Myc oncoproteins .
This antagonism relates partly to their ability to compete with Myc for the protein Max and for consensus DNA binding sites and to recruit transcriptional co-repressors .
Mad ( Mxi1 ) proteins have been suggested to be essential in cellular growth control and\/or in the induction and maintenance of the differentiated state .
Consistent with these roles , mxi1 may be the tumour-suppressor gene that resides at region 24-26 of the long arm of chromosome 10 .
This region is a cancer hotspot , and mutations here may be involved in several cancers , including prostate adenocarcinoma .
Here we show that mice lacking Mxi1 exhibit progressive , multisystem abnormalities .
These mice also show increased susceptibility to tumorigenesis either following carcinogen treatment or when also deficient in Ink4a .
This cancer-prone phenotype may correlate with the enhanced ability of several mxi1-deficient cell types , including prostatic epithelium , to proliferate .
Our results show that Mxi1 is involved in the homeostasis of differentiated organ systems , acts as a tumor suppressor in vivo , and engages the Myc network in a functionally relevant manner .
Retinoschisin, the X-linked retinoschisis protein, is a secreted photoreceptor protein, and is expressed and released by Weri-Rb1 cells.
X-linked retinoschisis is characterized by microcystic-like changes of the macular region and schisis within the inner retinal layers , leading to visual deterioration in males .
Many missense and protein-truncating mutations of the causative gene RS1 have now been identified and are thought to be inactivating .
RS1 encodes a 224 amino acid protein , retinoschisin , which contains a discoidin domain but is of unknown function .
We have generated a polyclonal antibody against a peptide from a unique region within retinoschisin , which detects a protein of approximately 28 kDa in retinal samples reduced with dithiothreitol , but multimers sized ) 40 kDa under non-reducing conditions .
A screen of human tissues with this antibody reveals retinoschisin to be retina specific and the antibody detects a protein of similar size in bovine and murine retinae .
We investigated the expression pattern in the retina of both RS1 mRNA ( using in situ hybridization with riboprobes ) and retinoschisin ( using immunohistochemistry ) .
The antisense riboprobe detected RS1 mRNA only in the photoreceptor layer but the protein product of the gene was present both in the photoreceptors and within the inner portions of the retina .
Furthermore , differentiated retinoblastoma cells ( Weri-Rb1 cells ) were found to express RS1 mRNA and to release retinoschisin .
These results suggest that retinoschisin is released by photo-receptors and has functions within the inner retinal layers .
Thus , X-linked retinoschisis is caused by abnormalities in a putative secreted photoreceptor protein and is the first example of a secreted photo-receptor protein associated with a retinal dystrophy .
Human TREK2, a 2P domain mechano-sensitive K+ channel with multiple regulations by polyunsaturated fatty acids, lysophospholipids, and Gs, Gi, and Gq protein-coupled receptors.
Mechano-sensitive and fatty acid-activated K ( + ) belong to the structural class of K ( + ) channel with two pore domains .
Here , we report the isolation and the characterization of a novel member of this family .
This channel , called TREK2 , is closely related to TREK1 ( 78 % of homology ) .
Its gene is located on chromosome 14q31 .
TREK2 is abundantly expressed in pancreas and kidney and to a lower level in brain , testis , colon , and small intestine .
In the central nervous system , TREK2 has a widespread distribution with the highest levels of expression in cerebellum , occipital lobe , putamen , and thalamus .
In transfected cells , TREK2 produces rapidly activating and non-inactivating outward rectifier K ( + ) currents .
The single-channel conductance is 100 picosiemens at +40 mV in 150 mm K ( + ) .
The currents can be strongly stimulated by polyunsaturated fatty acid such as arachidonic , docosahexaenoic , and linoleic acids and by lysophosphatidylcholine .
The channel is also activated by acidification of the intracellular medium .
TREK2 is blocked by application of intracellular cAMP .
As with TREK1 , TREK2 is activated by the volatile general anesthetics chloroform , halothane , and isoflurane and by the neuroprotective agent riluzole .
TREK2 can be positively or negatively regulated by a variety of neurotransmitter receptors .
Stimulation of the G ( s ) - coupled receptor 5HT4sR or the G ( q ) - coupled receptor mGluR1 inhibits channel activity , whereas activation of the G ( i ) - coupled receptor mGluR2 increases TREK2 currents .
These multiple types of regulations suggest that TREK2 plays an important role as a target of neurotransmitter action .
Cloning and characterization of a G protein-activated human phosphoinositide-3 kinase.
Phosphoinositide-3 kinase activity is implicated in diverse cellular responses triggered by mammalian cell surface receptors and in the regulation of protein sorting in yeast .
Receptors with intrinsic and associated tyrosine kinase activity recruit heterodimeric phosphoinositide-3 kinases that consist of p110 catalytic subunits and p85 adaptor molecules containing Src homology 2 ( SH2 ) domains .
A phosphoinositide-3 kinase isotype , p110 gamma , was cloned and characterized .
The p110 gamma enzyme was activated in vitro by both the alpha and beta gamma subunits of heterotrimeric guanosine triphosphate ( GTP ) - binding proteins ( G proteins ) and did not interact with p85 .
A potential pleckstrin homology domain is located near its amino terminus .
The p110 gamma isotype may link signaling through G protein-coupled receptors to the generation of phosphoinositide second messengers phosphorylated in the D-3 position .
hSK4, a member of a novel subfamily of calcium-activated potassium channels.
The gene for hSK4 , a novel human small conductance calcium-activated potassium channel , or SK channel , has been identified and expressed in Chinese hamster ovary cells .
In physiological saline hSK4 generates a conductance of approximately 12 pS , a value in close agreement with that of other cloned SK channels .
Like other members of this family , the polypeptide encoded by hSK4 contains a previously unnoted leucine zipper-like domain in its C terminus of unknown function .
hSK4 appears unique , however , in its very high affinity for Ca2 + ( EC50 of 95 nM ) and its predominant expression in nonexcitable tissues of adult animals .
Together with the relatively low homology of hSK4 to other SK channel polypeptides ( approximately 40 % identical ) , these data suggest that hSK4 belongs to a novel subfamily of SK channels .
Isolation of cDNA clones coding for rat isovaleryl-CoA dehydrogenase and assignment of the gene to human chromosome 15.
Rat liver mRNA encoding the cytoplasmic precursor of mitochondrial isovaleryl-CoA dehydrogenase was highly enriched by polysome immunopurification using a polyclonal monospecific antibody .
The purified mRNA was used to prepare a plasmid cDNA library which was screened with two oligonucleotide mixtures encoding two peptides in the amino-terminal portion of mature rat isovaleryl-CoA dehydrogenase .
Thirty-one overlapping cDNA clones , spanning a region of 2.1 kbp , were isolated and characterized .
The cDNA sequence of a 5 ' - end clone , rIVD-13 ( 155 bp ) , predicts a mitochondrial leader peptide of 30 amino acid residues and the first 18 amino acids of the mature protein .
These consecutive 18 residues completely matched the amino-terminal peptide determined by automated Edman degradation of the rat enzyme .
The leader peptide contains six arginines , has no acidic residues , and is particularly rich in leucine , alanine , and proline residues .
Southern blot analysis of DNAs from human-rodent somatic cell hybrids with an isolated rat cDNA ( 2 kbp ) assigned the isovaleryl-CoA dehydrogenase gene to the long arm of chromosome 15 , region q14 -- qter .
The chromosomal assignment was confirmed and further refined to bands q14 -- q15 by in situ hybridization of the probe to human metaphase cells .
This location differs from that of the gene for medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase , a closely related enzyme , which has been previously assigned to chromosome 1 .
Molecular cloning of cDNA encoding an unrecognized component of amyloid in Alzheimer disease.
A neuropathological hallmark of Alzheimer disease ( AD ) is a widespread amyloid deposition .
We analyzed the entire amino acid sequences in an amyloid preparation and found , in addition to the major beta\/A4-protein ( A beta ) fragment , two unknown peptides .
We raised antibodies against synthetic peptides using subsequences of these peptides .
These antibodies immunostained amyloid in neuritic and diffuse plaques as well as vascular amyloid .
Electron microscopic analysis demonstrated that the immunostaining was localized on amyloid fibrils .
We have isolated an apparently full-length cDNA encoding a 140-amino-acid protein within which two previously unreported amyloid sequences are encoded in tandem in the most hydrophobic domain .
We tentatively named this 35-amino acid peptide NAC ( non-A beta component of AD amyloid ) and its precursor NACP .
NAC is the second component , after A beta , identified chemically in the purified AD amyloid preparation .
Secondary structure predictions indicate that the NAC peptide sequence has a strong tendency to form beta-structures consistent with its association with amyloid .
NACP is detected as a M ( r ) 19,000 protein in the cytosolic fraction of brain homogenates and comigrates on immunoblots with NACP synthesized in Escherichia coli from NACP cDNA .
NACP mRNA is expressed principally in brain but is also expressed in low concentrations in all tissues examined except in liver , suggesting its ubiquitous and brain-specific functions .
The availability of the cDNA encoding full-length NACP should help to elucidate the mechanisms of amyloidosis in AD .
Cloning, expression and localization of an RNA helicase gene from a human lymphoid cell line with chromosomal breakpoint 11q23.3.
A gene encoding a putative human RNA helicase , p54 , has been cloned and mapped to the band q23 .3 of chromosome 11 .
The predicted amino acid sequence shares a striking homology ( 75 % identical ) with the female germline-specific RNA helicase ME31B gene of Drosophila .
Unlike ME31B , however , the new gene expresses an abundant transcript in a large number of adult tissues and its 5 ' non-coding region was found split in a t ( 11 ; 14 ) ( q23 .3 ; q32 .3 ) cell line from a diffuse large B-cell lymphoma .
Distinct pharmacological properties and distribution in neurons and endocrine cells of two isoforms of the human vesicular monoamine transporter.
A second isoform of the human vesicular monoamine transporter ( hVMAT ) has been cloned from a pheochromocytoma cDNA library .
The contribution of the two transporter isoforms to monoamine storage in human neuroendocrine tissues was examined with isoform-specific polyclonal antibodies against hVMAT1 and hVMAT2 .
Central , peripheral , and enteric neurons express only VMAT2 .
VMAT1 is expressed exclusively in neuroendocrine , including chromaffin and enterochromaffin , cells .
VMAT1 and VMAT2 are coexpressed in all chromaffin cells of the adrenal medulla .
VMAT2 alone is expressed in histamine-storing enterochromaffin-like cells of the oxyntic mucosa of the stomach .
The transport characteristics and pharmacology of each VMAT isoform have been directly compared after expression in digitonin-permeabilized fibroblastic ( CV-1 ) cells , providing information about substrate feature recognition by each transporter and the role of vesicular monoamine storage in the mechanism of action of psychopharmacologic and neurotoxic agents in human .
Serotonin has a similar affinity for both transporters .
Catecholamines exhibit a 3-fold higher affinity , and histamine exhibits a 30-fold higher affinity , for VMAT2 .
Reserpine and ketanserin are slightly more potent inhibitors of VMAT2-mediated transport than of VMAT1-mediated transport , whereas tetrabenazine binds to and inhibits only VMAT2 .
N-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium , phenylethylamine , amphetamine , and methylenedioxymethamphetamine are all more potent inhibitors of VMAT2 than of VMAT1 , whereas fenfluramine is a more potent inhibitor of VMAT1-mediated monamine transport than of VMAT2-mediated monoamine transport .
The unique distributions of hVMAT1 and hVMAT2 provide new markers for multiple neuroendocrine lineages , and examination of their transport properties provides mechanistic insights into the pharmacology and physiology of amine storage in cardiovascular , endocrine , and central nervous system function .
Cloning and chromosomal location of a novel member of the myotonic dystrophy family of protein kinases.
We have cloned a novel serine\/threonine protein kinase ( PK428 ) which is highly related ( 65 % ) within the kinase domain to the myotonic dystrophy protein kinase ( DM-PK ) , as well as the cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase ( 33 % ) .
Northern blots demonstrate that PK428 mRNA is distributed widely among tissues and is expressed at the highest levels in pancreas , heart , and skeletal muscle , with lower levels in liver and lung .
Two PK428 mRNAs 10 and 3.8 kilobase pairs in size are seen in a number of cell lines , including hematopoietic and breast cancer cells .
An antibody generated to a glutathione S-transferase-PK428 fusion protein detects a 65-kDa protein in these cell lines , and a similarly sized protein when the cloned cDNA is transiently expressed in Cos 7 cells .
Immunoprecipitation of the transiently expressed PK428 protein and incubation with ( gamma-32P ) ATP demonstrate that it is capable of autophosphorylation .
In addition , immunoprecipitates of the PK428 protein kinase also phosphorylated histone H1 and a peptide encoding a cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase substrate .
The gene corresponding to the 3.8-kb PK428 mRNA , and its corresponding 65-kDa protein , was isolated by polymerase chain reaction screening of a P1 phage human genomic library .
Using this P1 phage clone as a probe , the PK428 gene was located on 1q41-42 , a possible location for a human senescence gene , a gene associated with Rippling muscle disease , as well as a region associated with genetically acquired mental retardation .
Fibulin-2 (FBLN2): human cDNA sequence, mRNA expression, and mapping of the gene on human and mouse chromosomes.
Fibulin-2 is a new extracellular matrix protein that we recently identified by characterizing mouse cDNA clones .
Fibulin-2 mRNA is prominently expressed in mouse heart tissue and is present in low amounts in other tissues .
In this study , we isolated and sequenced a 4.1-kb human fibulin-2 cDNA , which encoded a mature protein of 1157 amino acids preceded by a 27-residue signal sequence .
The predicted polypeptide contains three consecutive anaphylatoxin-related segments ( domain I ) in its central region followed by 10 EGF-like repeats ( domain II ) , 9 of which have a consensus sequence for calcium binding .
The 408-residue N-terminal region consists of two separate subdomains , a cysteine-rich segment of 150 residues ( Na subdomain ) and a cysteine-free segment with a stretch of acidic amino acids ( Nb subdomain ) .
The 115-residue C-terminal segment ( domain III ) is similar to the C variant of fibulin-1 .
The amino acid sequences of the human and mouse fibulin-2 share approximately 90 % identity in domains Na , I , II , and III but only 62 % identity in domain Nb .
The human cDNA lacks an EGF-like repeat , which is alternatively spliced in the mouse cDNA clones , and a potential cell-binding Arg-Gly-Asp sequence found in the Nb domain of the mouse counterpart .
Northern blot analysis of mRNA from various human tissues reveals an abundant 4.5-kb transcript in heart , placenta , and ovary tissue .
The expression pattern differs from that of fibulin-1 .
The fibulin-2 gene was localized by in situ hybridization to the p24-p25 region of human chromosome 3 and to the band D-E of mouse chromosome 6 .
Functional consequences of tumorigenic missense mutations in the amino-terminal domain of Smad4.
Smads , the intracellular effectors of transforming growth factor-beta ( TGF-beta ) family members , are somatically mutated at high frequency in particular types of human cancers .
Certain of these mutations affect the Smad amino-terminal domain , which , in the case of Smad3 and Smad4 , binds DNA .
We investigated the functional consequences of four missense mutations in the Smad4 amino-terminal domain found in human tumors .
The mutant proteins were found to have impaired abilities to bind DNA although they were fully capable of forming complexes with Smad3 .
All four Smad4 mutants showed decreased protein stability compared to wild-type Smad4 .
Two of the Smad4 mutants ( G65V and P130S ) were translocated to the nucleus and were capable of transactivating a Smad-dependent promoter in a ligand-dependent manner .
In contrast , the L43S and R100T mutants were not translocated efficiently to the nucleus and consequently resulted in severely defective transcriptional responses to TGF-beta .
Moreover , we demonstrate here the critical importance of two basic residues in the beta-hairpin loop of Smad3 or Smad4 for DNA binding , consistent with predictions from the Smad3 crystal structure .
In addition , our results reveal that in the TGF-beta-induced heteromeric signaling complex , loss of DNA binding of Smad4 can be compensated by Smad3 , however , both Smad3 and Smad4 are needed for efficient DNA binding and signaling .
In conclusion , mutations in the amino-terminal domain of Smad4 , that are found in cancer , show loss of multiple functional properties which may contribute to tumorigenesis .
Differential expression of FMR1, FXR1 and FXR2 proteins in human brain and testis.
Lack of expression of the fragile X mental retardation protein ( FMRP ) results in mental retardation and macroorchidism , seen as the major pathological symptoms in fragile X patients .
FMRP is a cytoplasmic RNA-binding protein which cosediments with the 60S ribosomal subunit .
Recently , two proteins homologous to FMRP were discovered : FXR1 and FXR2 .
These novel proteins interact with FMRP and with each other and they are also associated with the 60S ribosomal subunit .
Here , we studied the expression pattern of the three proteins in brain and testis by immunohistochemistry .
In adult brain , FMR1 , FXR1 and FXR2 proteins are coexpressed in the cytoplasm of specific differentiated neurons only .
However , we observed a different expression pattern in fetal brain as well as in adult and fetal testis , suggesting independent functions for the three proteins in those tissues during embryonic development and adult life .
Molecular cloning of the cDNA for the catalytic subunit of human DNA polymerase epsilon.
The cDNA encoding the catalytic polypeptide of human DNA polymerase epsilon was cloned .
The deduced amino acid sequence reveals that the catalytic polypeptide is 2257 amino acids in length and its calculated molecular mass is 258 kDa .
A single RNA message of 7.5 kilobases was recognized by isolated cDNA clones .
The identity of the cDNA was verified by direct amino acid sequencing of tryptic fragments derived from the catalytic polypeptide of the HeLa DNA polymerase epsilon .
The primary structure comparison with multiple DNA polymerases indicates that human DNA polymerase epsilon catalytic polypeptide is a homolog of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae DNA polymerase II catalytic polypeptide .
The proteins are 39 % identical .
In the region containing known DNA polymerase consensus motifs , the identity is 63 % .
The expression of the mRNA encoding DNA polymerase epsilon is strongly dependent on cell proliferation .
ZW10 helps recruit dynactin and dynein to the kinetochore.
Mutations in the Drosophila melanogaster zw10 gene , which encodes a conserved , essential kinetochore component , abolish the ability of dynein to localize to kinetochores .
Several similarities between the behavior of ZW10 protein and dynein further support a role for ZW10 in the recruitment of dynein to the kinetochore : ( a ) in response to bipolar tension across the chromosomes , both proteins mostly leave the kinetochore at metaphase , when their association with the spindle becomes apparent ; ( b ) ZW10 and dynein both bind to functional neocentromeres of structurally acentric minichromosomes ; and ( c ) the localization of both ZW10 and dynein to the kinetochore is abolished in cells mutant for the gene rough deal .
ZW10 's role in the recruitment of dynein to the kinetochore is likely to be reasonably direct , because dynamitin , the p50 subunit of the dynactin complex , interacts with ZW10 in a yeast two-hybrid screen .
Since in zw10 mutants no defects in chromosome behavior are observed before anaphase onset , our results suggest that dynein at the kinetochore is essential for neither microtubule capture nor congression to the metaphase plate .
Instead , dynein 's role at the kinetochore is more likely to be involved in the coordination of chromosome separation and\/or poleward movement at anaphase onset .
Expression of central and peripheral cannabinoid receptors in human immune tissues and leukocyte subpopulations.
Two proteins with seven transmembrane-spanning domains typical of guanosine-nucleotide-binding-protein-coupled receptors have been identified as cannabinoid receptors ; the central cannabinoid receptor , CB1 , and the peripheral cannabinoid receptor , CB2 , initially described in rat brain and spleen , respectively .
Here , we report the distribution patterns for both CB1 and CB2 transcripts in human immune cells and in several human tissues , as analyzed using a highly sensitive and quantitative PCR-based method .
CB1 was mainly expressed in the central nervous system and , to a lower extent , in several peripheral tissues such as adrenal gland , heart , lung , prostate , uterus , ovary , testis , bone marrow , thymus and tonsils .
In contrast , the CB2 gene , which is not expressed in the brain , was particularly abundant in immune tissues , with an expression level 10-100-fold higher than that of CB1 .
Although CB2 mRNA was also detected in some other peripheral tissues , its level remained very low .
In spleen and tonsils , the CB2 mRNA content was equivalent to that of CB1 mRNA in the central nervous system .
Among the main human blood cell subpopulations , the distribution pattern of the CB2 mRNA displayed important variations .
The rank order of CB2 mRNA levels in these cells was B-cells ) natural killer cells ) ) monocytes ) polymorphonuclear neutrophil cells ) T8 cells ) T4 cells .
The same rank order was also established in human cell lines belonging to the myeloid , monocytic and lymphoid lineages .
The prevailing expression of the CB2 gene in immune tissues was confirmed by Northern-blot analysis .
In addition , the expression of the CB2 protein was demonstrated by an immunohistological analysis performed on tonsil sections using specific anti- ( human CB2 ) IgG ; this experiment showed that CB2 expression was restricted to B-lymphocyte-enriched areas of the mantle of secondary lymphoid follicles .
These results suggest that ( a ) CB1 and CB2 can be considered as tissue-selective antigens of the central nervous system and immune system , respectively , and ( b ) cannabinoids may exert specific receptor-mediated actions on the immune system through the CB2 receptor .
C3G, a guanine nucleotide-releasing protein expressed ubiquitously, binds to the Src homology 3 domains of CRK and GRB2/ASH proteins.
CRK protein , together with GRB2\/ASH and Nck proteins , belongs to the adaptor-type Src homology ( SH ) 2-containing molecules , which transduce signals from tyrosine kinases .
Here another guanine nucleotide-releasing protein ( GNRP ) , C3G , has been identified as a CRK SH3-binding protein .
The nucleotide sequence of a 4.1-kb C3G cDNA contains a 3.2-kb open reading frame encoding a 121-kDa protein , and antibodies against C3G have been shown to detect a protein of 130-140 kDa .
The carboxyl terminus of C3G has a peptide sequence homologous to GNRPs for Ras , and the expression of this carboxyl terminus region suppresses the loss of CDC25 function in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae .
The C3G protein expressed in Escherichia coli binds to CRK and GRB2\/ASH proteins .
Mutational analysis of C3G assigns the SH3 binding region to a 50-amino acid region containing a proline-rich sequence .
The mRNAs of both the C3G and CRK proteins are expressed ubiquitously in human adult and fetal tissues .
The results of these studies suggest that the complex of CRK and C3G , or GRB2\/ASH and C3G , may transduce the signals from tyrosine kinases to Ras in a number of different tissues .
A human BRCA2 complex containing a structural DNA binding component influences cell cycle progression.
Germline mutations of the human BRCA2 gene confer susceptibility to breast cancer .
Although the function of the BRCA2 protein remains to be determined , murine cells homozygous for BRCA2 inactivation display chromosomal aberrations .
We have isolated a 2 MDa BRCA2-containing complex and identified a structural DNA binding component , designated as BRCA2-Associated Factor 35 ( BRAF35 ) .
BRAF35 contains a nonspecific DNA binding HMG domain and a kinesin-like coiled coil domain .
Similar to BRCA2 , BRAF35 mRNA expression levels in mouse embryos are highest in proliferating tissues with high mitotic index .
Strikingly , nuclear staining revealed a close association of BRAF35\/BRCA2 complex with condensed chromatin coincident with histone H3 phosphorylation .
Importantly , antibody microinjection experiments suggest a role for BRCA2\/BRAF35 complex in modulation of cell cycle progression .
Bis, a Bcl-2-binding protein that synergizes with Bcl-2 in preventing cell death.
Bcl-2 is the best characterized inhibitor of apoptosis , although the molecular basis of this action is not fully understood .
Using a protein interaction cloning procedure , we identified a human gene designated as bis ( mapped to chromosome 10q25 ) that encoded a novel Bcl-2-interacting protein .
Bis protein showed no significant homology with Bcl-2 family proteins and had no prominent functional motif .
Co-immunoprecipitation analysis confirmed that Bis interacted with Bcl-2 in vivo .
DNA transfection experiments indicated that Bis itself exerted only weak anti-apoptotic activity , but was synergistic with Bcl-2 in preventing Bax-induced and Fas-mediated apoptosis .
These results suggest that Bis is a novel modulator of cellular anti-apoptotic activity that functions through its interaction with Bcl-2 .
A minK-HERG complex regulates the cardiac potassium current I(Kr).
MinK is a widely expressed protein of relative molecular mass approximately 15K that forms potassium channels by aggregation with other membrane proteins .
MinK governs ion channel activation , regulation by second messengers , and the function and structure of the ion conduction pathway .
Association of minK with a channel protein known as KvLQT1 produces a voltage-gated outward K + current ( I ( sK ) ) resembling the slow cardiac repolarization current ( I ( Ks ) ) .
HERG , a human homolog of the ether-a-go-go gene of the fruitfly Drosophila melanogaster , encodes a protein that produces the rapidly activating cardiac delayed rectifier ( I ( Kr ) ) .
These two potassium currents , I ( Ks ) and I ( Kr ) , provide the principal repolarizing currents in cardiac myocytes for the termination of action potentials .
Although heterologously expressed HERG channels are largely indistinguishable from native cardiac I ( Kr ) , a role for minK in this current is suggested by the diminished I ( Kr ) in an atrial tumor line subjected to minK antisense suppression .
Here we show that HERG and minK form a stable complex , and that this heteromultimerization regulates I ( Kr ) activity .
MinK , through the formation of heteromeric channel complexes , is thus central to the control of the heart rate and rhythm .
Cloning and characterisation of the Sry-related transcription factor gene Sox8.
SOX proteins form a large family of transcription factors related by a DNA-binding domain known as the HMG box .
Some 30 Sox genes have been identified in mammals and orthologues have been found in a wide range of other metazoans .
Sox genes are highly conserved and are known to play important roles in embryonic development , including roles in gonadal , central nervous system , neural crest and skeletal development .
Several SOX genes have been implicated in human congenital diseases .
We report here the isolation of Sox8 and its characterisation in mice and humans .
This gene has a remarkably similar primary structure and genomic organization to the campomelic dysplasia gene SOX9 and the Waardenburg-Shah syndrome gene SOX10 .
SOX8 protein is able to bind to canonical SOX target DNA sequences and activate transcription in vitro through two separate trans - activation regions .
Further , Sox8 is expressed in the central nervous system , limbs , kidneys , gonads and craniofacial structures during mouse embryo development .
Sox8 maps to the t complex on mouse chromosome 17 and to human chromosome 16p13 .3 , a region associated with the microphthalmia-cataract syndrome CATM and the alpha-thalassemia\/mental retardation syndrome ATR-16 .
Localization and enhanced current density of the Kv4.2 potassium channel by interaction with the actin-binding protein filamin.
Kv4 .2 potassium channels play a critical role in postsynaptic excitability .
Immunocytochemical studies reveal a somatodendritic Kv4 .2 expression pattern , with the channels concentrated mainly at dendritic spines .
The molecular mechanism that underlies the localization of Kv4 .2 to this subcellular region is unknown .
We used the yeast two-hybrid system to identify the Kv4.2-associated proteins that are involved in channel localization .
Here we demonstrate a direct interaction between Kv4 .2 and the actin-binding protein , filamin .
We show that Kv4 .2 and filamin can be coimmunoprecipitated both in vitro and in brain and that Kv4 .2 and filamin share an overlapping expression pattern in the cerebellum and cultured hippocampal neurons .
To examine the functional consequences of this interaction , we expressed Kv4 .2 in filamin ( + ) and filamin ( - ) cells and performed immunocytochemical and electrophysiological analyses .
Our results indicate that Kv4 .2 colocalizes with filamin at filopodial roots in filamin ( + ) cells but shows a nonspecific expression pattern in filamin ( - ) cells , with no localization to filopodial roots .
Furthermore , the magnitude of whole-cell Kv4 .2 current density is approximately 2.7-fold larger in filamin ( + ) cells as compared with these currents in filamin ( - ) cells .
We propose that filamin may function as a scaffold protein in the postsynaptic density , mediating a direct link between Kv4 .2 and the actin cytoskeleton , and that this interaction is essential for the generation of appropriate Kv4 .2 current densities .
Aprataxin, the causative protein for EAOH is a nuclear protein with a potential role as a DNA repair protein.
Early-onset ataxia with ocular motor apraxia and hypoalbuminemia ( EAOH ) is an autosomal recessive neurodegenerative disorder characterized by early-onset ataxia , ocular motor apraxia , and hypoalbuminemia .
Recently , the causative gene for EAOH , APTX , has been identified .
Of the two splicing variants of APTX mRNA , the short and the long forms , long-form APTX mRNA was found to be the major isoform .
Aprataxin is mainly located in the nucleus , and , furthermore , the first nuclear localization signal located near the amino terminus of the long-form aprataxin is essential for its nuclear localization .
We found , based on the yeast two-hybrid and coimmunoprecipitation experiments , that the long-form but not the short-form aprataxin interacts with XRCC1 ( x-ray repair cross-complementing group 1 ) .
Interestingly the amino terminus of the long-form aprataxin is homologous with polynucleotidekinase-3 ' - phosphatase , which has been demonstrated to be involved in base excision repair , a subtype of single-strand DNA break repair , through interaction with XRCC1 , DNA polymerase beta , and DNA ligase III .
These results strongly support the possibility that aprataxin and XRCC1 constitute a multiprotein complex and are involved in single-strand DNA break repair , and furthermore , that accumulation of unrepaired damaged DNA underlies the pathophysiological mechanisms of EAOH .
Isolation of full-length cDNA of mouse PAX4 gene and identification of its human homologue.
Recent genetic studies have suggested that PAX4 , a member of the paired box ( PAX ) gene family , is involved in the mechanism regulating the fate of pancreatic islet endocrine progenitor cells .
Murine PAX4 was originally identified by genomic screening and , to date , only a partial sequence of PAX4 has been reported .
In this study , we cloned the full-length cDNA of mouse PAX4 by RACE ( rapid amplification of cDNA ends ) using RNA from MIN6 cells , a mouse insulinoma cell line .
The full length of cDNA was 1.38 kb , consistent with the estimated size of the transcript by Northern blot .
The deduced mouse PAX4 protein was 349 amino acids and had the predicted molecular weight of 38 kDa .
Two DNA binding motifs , a 128-amino acid paired domain and a 61-amino acid paired-type homeodomain exhibit the highest amino acid homology with PAX6 ( 71.2 % , 65.0 % , respectively ) , another member of the PAX gene family .
However , the sequence of the C-terminal segment of PAX4 diverged and showed no significant homology with any other known PAX genes .
As to the genomic DNA , the coding region of the mouse PAX4 gene spanned approximately 5.5 kb and was composed of 10 exons .
In the public DNA database , a human cosmid ( g1572c264 ) , which was localized on human chromosome 7q31 .3 , was found to contain a gene homologous to PAX4 .
The nucleotide and protein sequence homologies between mouse PAX4 and its human homolog were 83.1 % and 80.0 % , respectively .
Interestingly , the ARP5 ( ADP-ribosylation factor 5 ) gene was also found in the same cosmid g1572c264 , suggesting the ARP5 gene to be adjacent to the human PAX4 homolog .
The human cosmid g1572c264 contains at least four SSRPs ( simple sequence repeat polymorphism ) , which could be used for genetic linkage studies of the locus .
The results of this study , i.e. isolation of the full-length cDNA sequence of PAX4 and identification of the homologous human gene , will facilitate further functional and genetic studies of the PAX4 gene .
Generation of a transcription map at the HSD17B locus centromeric to BRCA1 at 17q21.
A detailed transcription map of the 320-kb region containing the HSD17B locus on chromosome 17 was generated .
Thirty unique cDNA fragments , retrieved following the hybridization of immobilized YACs to primary pools of cDNAs prepared from RNA of mammary gland , ovary , placenta , and the Caco-2 cell line , were aligned into 10 transcription units by physical mapping and hybridization to RNAs of a series of tissues .
The cDNAs were then further characterized by sequencing and used to screen mammary gland cDNA libraries .
Fragments corresponding to the broadly expressed gamma-tubulin and Ki antigen genes were identified .
A full-length cDNA clone encoding a 117-amino-acid protein homologous to the rat ribosomal protein L34 was isolated .
Portions of genes with restricted patterns of expression were also obtained , including the previously characterized HSD17B1 .
One new gene , for which a full-length cDNA was isolated , was found to have an interesting tissue-specific pattern of expression with abundant mRNA in both the colon and the testis and in the mammary carcinoma cell line BT-474 .
This contrasted with the barely detectable level observed in several tissues including normal mammary gland .
Of the five additional transcription units identified , one showed no similarity , two showed identity to human expressed sequences , and two displayed similarity to genes of animal species by amino acid alignment .
These latter cDNA clones include potential homologs of a rat nuclear tyrosine phosphatase and of a factor of Drosophila that is known to be involved in the negative regulation of transcription of segment identity genes .
De novo mutation of the myelin P0 gene in Dejerine-Sottas disease (hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy type III).
We have investigated the myelin P0 gene on chromosome 1 as a candidate gene in two sporadic cases with Dejerine-Sottas disease or hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy ( HMSN ) type III .
We found different mutations , a cysteine substitution for serine 63 in the extracellular domain and an arginine substitution for glycine 167 in the transmembrane domain .
The patients were genetically heterozygous for the normal allele and the mutant allele , which was absent in their parents and in one hundred unrelated , healthy controls .
The results strongly suggest that a de novo dominant mutation of the P0 gene is responsible for at least some sporadic cases of Dejerine-Sottas disease .
Primary structure and functional expression of rat and human stem cell factor DNAs.
Partial cDNA and genomic clones of rat stem cell factor ( SCF ) have been isolated .
Using probes based on the rat sequence , partial and full-length cDNA and genomic clones of human SCF have been isolated .
Based on the primary structure of the 164 amino acid protein purified from BRL-3A cells , truncated forms of the rat and human proteins have been expressed in E. coli and mammalian cells and have been shown to possess biological activity .
SCF is able to augment the proliferation of both myeloid and lymphoid hematopoietic progenitors in bone marrow cultures .
SCF exhibits potent synergistic activities in conjunction with colony-stimulating factors , resulting in increased colony numbers and colony size .
The relationship between agonist intrinsic activity and the rate of endocytosis of muscarinic receptors in a human neuroblastoma cell line.
The molecular mechanisms underlying the internalization of G protein-coupled receptors are still poorly understood .
Normally agonists but not antagonists cause internalization ( defined here as a reduction in the number of receptors at the cell surface ) , suggesting a functional relationship between agonist activity and internalization .
In this study we investigated the effects of eight muscarinic ligands on the rate constants for endocytosis and recycling of m3 muscarinic acetylcholine receptors in human SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells .
We found that there was a linear correlation between the intrinsic activity of the ligand and its ability to increase the rate constant for endocytosis , suggesting that the same active conformation of the receptor is responsible for stimulating both second messenger generation and receptor endocytosis .
In contrast , the rate constant for recycling did not depend on which agonist had triggered receptor endocytosis , suggesting that recycling is a purely constitutive process .
Because receptor internalization depends on the rate constants for both endocytosis and recycling , the relationship between internalization and intrinsic activity is nonlinear .
In particular , mathematical modeling of receptor trafficking revealed that under certain conditions very small ( 3 % or less ) increases in the rate constant for endocytosis are sufficient to cause substantial receptor internalization .
An important implication of this analysis is that extremely weak partial agonists ( which may in practice be indistinguishable from antagonists ) may produce significant receptor internalization .
Isolation, characterization, and chromosomal mapping of a novel cDNA clone encoding human selenium binding protein.
We have isolated the full-length human 56 kDa selenium binding protein ( hSP56 ) cDNA clone , which is the human homolog of mouse 56 kDa selenium binding protein .
The cDNA is 1,668 bp long and has an open reading frame encoding 472 amino acids .
The calculated molecular weight is 52.25 kDa and the estimated isoelectric point is 6.13 .
Using Northern blot hybridization , we found that this 56 kDa selenium binding protein is expressed in mouse heart with an intermediate level between those found in liver\/lung\/kidney and intestine .
We have also successfully expressed hSP56 in Escherichia coli using the expression vector-pAED4 .
The hSP56 gene is located at human chromosome 1q21-22 ) .
Human muscle phosphoglycerate mutase deficiency: newly discovered metabolic myopathy.
Muscle phosphoglycerate mutase activity was decreased ( 5.7 percent of the lowest control value ) in a 52-year-old man with intolerance for strenuous exercise and recurrent pigmenturia since adolescence .
All of the other enzymes of glycolysis had normal activities , and glycogen concentration was normal .
Electrophoretic , heat lability , and mercury inhibition studies showed that the small residual activity in the patient 's muscle was represented by the brain ( BB ) isoenzyme of phosphoglycerate mutase , suggesting a genetic defect of the M subunit which predominates in normal muscle .
The prevalence of the BB isoenzyme in other tissues , including muscle culture , may explain why symptoms were confined to muscle .
AMP-activated protein kinase suppresses protein synthesis in rat skeletal muscle through down-regulated mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling.
AMP-activated protein kinase ( AMPK ) is viewed as an energy sensor that acts to modulate glucose uptake and fatty acid oxidation in skeletal muscle .
Given that protein synthesis is a high energy-consuming process , it may be transiently depressed during cellular energy stress .
Thus , the intent of this investigation was to examine whether AMPK activation modulates the translational control of protein synthesis in skeletal muscle .
Injections of 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide 1-beta-d-ribonucleoside ( AICAR ) were used to activate AMPK in male rats .
The activity of alpha1 AMPK remained unchanged in gastrocnemius muscle from AICAR-treated animals compared with controls , whereas alpha2 AMPK activity was significantly increased ( 51 % ) .
AICAR treatment resulted in a reduction in protein synthesis to 45 % of the control value .
This depression was associated with decreased activation of protein kinases in the mammalian target of rapamycin ( mTOR ) signal transduction pathway as evidenced by reduced phosphorylation of protein kinase B on Ser ( 473 ) , mTOR on Ser ( 2448 ) , ribosomal protein S6 kinase on Thr ( 389 ) , and eukaryotic initiation factor eIF4E-binding protein on Thr ( 37 ) .
A reduction in eIF4E associated with eIF4G to 10 % of the control value was also noted .
In contrast , eIF2B activity remained unchanged in response to AICAR treatment and therefore would not appear to contribute to the depression in protein synthesis .
This is the first investigation to demonstrate changes in translation initiation and skeletal muscle protein synthesis in response to AMPK activation .
COUP transcription factor is a member of the steroid receptor superfamily.
The COUP ( chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter ) transcription factor ( COUP-TF ) exists in a number of different tissues and is essential for expression of the chicken ovalbumin gene .
It binds to the ovalbumin promoter and , in conjunction with a second protein ( S300-II ) , stimulates initiation of transcription in vitro .
COUP-TF also binds specifically to the rat insulin promoter element , although the two binding sites share little sequence similarity .
Here we report the isolation of a human complementary DNA clone encoding COUP-TF .
Comparison of the amino-acid sequence of COUP-TF with known sequences reveals that it is a member of the steroid\/thyroid hormone\/vitamin receptor superfamily .
Consequently , it is the first member of this family that has been shown to function in a cell-free transcription system .
We conclude that this superfamily of gene regulators contains proteins which bind and activate distal promoter elements of eukaryotic genes .
LEC induces chemotaxis and adhesion by interacting with CCR1 and CCR8.
Liver-expressed chemokine ( LEC ) is an unusually large CC chemokine , which is also known as LMC , HCC-4 , NCC-4 , and CCL16 .
Previously , LEC was shown to induce leukocyte migration but the responsible signaling receptors were not characterized .
We report chemotaxis and competitive binding studies that show LEC binds to and activates CCR1 and CCR8 transfected HEK-293 cells .
LEC induced maximal migration of CCR1 and CCR8 transfected cells at 89.3 nmol\/L and cell adhesion at 5.6 nmol\/L .
The molar concentration of LEC required to induce maximum cell migration is 20 - to 200-fold greater than that required for RANTES or I309 , respectively .
All 3 chemokines induced maximal static adhesion at 5 to 7 nmol\/L .
A neutralizing polyclonal antibody to LEC was developed to demonstrate that the unusually high concentration of LEC required to induce chemotaxis was a property of LEC and not as a result of an irrelevant protein contamination .
This study suggests that LEC may be a more effective inducer of cell adhesion than cell migration .
p57KIP2, a structurally distinct member of the p21CIP1 Cdk inhibitor family, is a candidate tumor suppressor gene.
Cyclin-dependent kinases ( Cdks ) are positive regulators of cell proliferation , whereas Cdk inhibitors ( CKIs ) inhibit proliferation .
We describe a new CKI , p57KIP2 , which is related to p21CIP1 and p27KIP1 .
p57KIP2 is a potent , tight-binding inhibitor of several G1 cyclin\/Cdk complexes , and its binding is cyclin dependent .
Unlike CIP1 , KIP2 is not regulated by p53 .
Overexpression of p57KIP2 arrests cells in G1 .
p57KIP2 proteins have a complex structure .
Mouse p57KIP2 consists of four structurally distinct domains : an amino-terminal Cdk inhibitory domain , a proline-rich domain , an acidic-repeat region , and a carboxy-terminal domain conserved with p27KIP1 .
Human p57KIP2 appears to have conserved the amino - and carboxy-terminal domains but has replaced the internal regions with sequences containing proline-alanine repeats .
In situ hybridization during mouse embryogenesis revealed that KIP2 mRNA displays a striking pattern of expression during development , showing high level expression in skeletal muscle , brain , heart , lungs , and eye .
Most of the KIP2-expressing cells are terminally differentiated , suggesting that p57KIP2 is involved in decisions to exit the cell cycle during development and differentiation .
Human KIP2 is located at 11p15 .5 , a region implicated in both sporadic cancers and Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome , a familial cancer syndrome , marking it as a candidate tumor suppressor .
The discovery of a new member of the p21CIP1 inhibitor family with novel structural features and expression patterns suggests a complex role for these proteins in cell cycle control and development .
Identification of four novel human genes amplified and overexpressed in breast carcinoma and localized to the q11-q21.3 region of chromosome 17.
We have performed differential screening of a human metastatic lymph lymph node cDNA library to identify genes possibly involved during breast cancer progression .
We have identified four novel genes overexpressed in malignant tiddues .
They were all located on the long arm of chromosome 17 , in loci located between q11 and q21 .3 , a region known to contain the c-erbB-2 oncogene and the BRCA1 breast carcinomas , and overexpression of three of them was dependent on gene amplification in breast cancer cell lines .
These findings further support the concept that human chromosome 17 specifically carries genes possibly involved in breast cancer progression .
Human liver serine dehydratase. cDNA cloning and sequence homology with hydroxyamino acid dehydratases from other sources.
Rat liver serine dehydratase cDNA was used to screen a human liver cDNA library in lambda gt11 .
One positive clone occurred in every 5,000 clones .
Fifteen positive clones were plaque purified .
The largest cDNA obtained contained an open reading frame of 987 base pairs , and 5 ' and 3 ' noncoding regions of 89 and 317 base pairs , respectively .
The deduced amino acid sequence , with a calculated Mr of 34,615 , was similar to that of rat liver serine dehydratase except for the absence of a segment consisting of 36 amino acid residues .
In vitro transcription\/translation with the cDNA resulted in the formation of a polypeptide with an Mr of approximately 35,000 , which cross-reacted with the anti-rat serine dehydratase antibody .
These results suggest that the human serine dehydratase is structurally cognate with the rat enzyme .
Moreover , portions of the sequence postulated to be essential for activity in microbial threonine dehydratases are found in the mammalian serine dehydratases , suggesting that hydroxyamino and dehydratases may have originated from a common ancestor .
Identification and expression of delta-isoforms of the multifunctional Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase in failing and nonfailing human myocardium.
Despite its importance for the regulation of heart function , little is known about the isoform expression of the multifunctional Ca2 + \/ calmodulin-dependent protein kinase ( CaMKII ) in human myocardium .
In this study , we investigated the spectrum of CaMKII isoforms delta2 , delta3 , delta4 , delta8 , and delta9 in human striated muscle tissue .
Isoform delta3 is characteristically expressed in cardiac muscle .
In skeletal muscle , specific expression of a new isoform termed delta11 is demonstrated .
Complete sequencing of human delta2 cDNA , representing all common features of the investigated CaMKII subclass , revealed its high homology to the corresponding rat cDNA .
Comparative semiquantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction analyses from left ventricular tissues of normal hearts and from patients suffering from dilated cardiomyopathy showed a significant increase in transcript levels of isoform delta3 relative to the expression of glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase in diseased hearts ( 101 .
6 + \/ -11.0 % versus 64.9 + \/ -9.9 % in the nonfailing group ; P ( 0.05 , n = 6 ) .
Transcript levels of the other investigated cardiac CaMKII isoforms remained unchanged .
At the protein level , by using a subclass-specific antibody , we observed a similar increase of a delta-CaMKII-specific signal ( 7.2 + \/ -1.0 versus 3.8 + \/ -0.7 optical density units in the nonfailing group ; P ( 0.05 , n = 4 through 6 ) .
The diseased state of the failing hearts was confirmed by a significant increase in transcript levels for atrial natriuretic peptide ( 292 .
9 + \/ -76.4 % versus 40.1 + \/ -3.2 % in the nonfailing group ; P ( 0.05 , n = 3 through 6 ) .
Our data characterize for the first time the delta-CaMKII isoform expression pattern in human hearts and demonstrate changes in this expression pattern in heart failure .
Characterization of human loricrin. Structure and function of a new class of epidermal cell envelope proteins.
We have isolated and characterized a full-length cDNA clone encoding human loricrin .
Curiously , this protein displays major differences from the recently described mouse loricrin ( Mehrel , T. , Hohl , D. , Nakazawa , H. , Rothnagel , J.A. , Longley , M.A. , Bundman , D. , Cheng , C.K. , Lichti , U. , Bisher , M.E. , Steven , A. C. , Steinert , P.M. , Yuspa , S.H. , and Roop , D.R. ( 1990 ) Cell 61 , 1103-1112 ) .
Although both proteins are glycine-serine-cysteine-rich , the sequences have not been conserved .
However , analysis of the sequences reveals a common motif of quasi-peptide repeats of an aliphatic or aromatic amino acid residue followed by several glycine and\/or serine and cysteine residues .
These sequences are interspersed and flanked by short glutamine - or glutamine\/lysine-rich peptides .
Thus loricrins consist of a family of cell envelope proteins of highly variable sequences that nevertheless retain common structural elements .
We show that unlike all other putative protein components of the cell envelope , loricrins are highly insoluble , due at least in part to cross-linking by disulfide bonds .
Furthermore , we have isolated four peptides from purified human cell envelopes that contain recognizable loricrin sequences and which are cross-linked by the N epsilon - ( gamma-glutamyl ) lysine isodipeptide bond .
The presence of such bonds thus affords an explanation for the extraordinary insolubility of loricrin by cross-linking to the cell envelope and can also explain the low steady-state levels of monomeric loricrin in cytoskeletal extracts of epidermis .
This study represents the first report of this isodipeptide cross-link in a protein component of the cornified cell envelope .
We propose a model for the structure of loricrin in which ( i ) the unusual glycine-serine-rich sequences adopt a flexible loop conformation , indexed on the recurrent aliphatic residues ; ( ii ) inter - or intramolecular isodipeptide and disulfide cross-links induce or stabilize folding of loricrin so as to form a more compact rosette-like structure ; and ( iii ) the presence of the flexible glycine-rich loops necessarily will impact a flexible character to the cell envelope and entire epithelium .
A novel form of cytochrome P-450 family 4 in human polymorphonuclear leukocytes. cDNA cloning and expression of leukotriene B4 omega-hydroxylase.
Isolation of cDNA clones for human leukotriene B4 ( LTB4 ) omega-hydroxylase clearly demonstrates that the hydroxylase is a member of the cytochrome P-450 ( CYP ) superfamily .
cDNA clones isolated from a human leukocyte cDNA library with CYP4A4 cDNA as a probe encode a protein of 520 amino acids with a molecular weight of 59,805 .
The deduced amino acid sequence contains an invariant cysteine in the conserved heme-binding domain near the C terminus , characteristic of the P-450 superfamily .
The microsomes from yeast cells transfected with an expression vector pAAH5 carrying isolated cDNA catalyzed the omega-hydroxylation of LTB4 with a Km value of 0.71 microM , and its activity was significantly inhibited by carbon monoxide and by antisera against CYP4A4 , consistent with the properties previously reported with LTB4 omega-hydroxylase in human polymorphonuclear leukocytes .
The amino acid sequence of LTB4 omega-hydroxylase ( P-450LTB omega ) shows 31-44 % similarity to those of CYP4A , CYP4B , and CYP4C , whereas less than 25 % similarity was observed with any of the other P-450 families .
According to the systematic classification of the P-450 superfamily , P-450LTB omega is classified into the CYP4 family but does not belong to any of the known CYP4 subfamilies .
This P-450 composes a new subfamily of CYP4 .
RNA blot analysis indicated that mRNA hybridized to the cDNA was expressed in the polymorphonuclear leukocytes as well as leukocytes from four individuals .
Isolation of the cDNA opens the way to investigate the physiological role and to regulation of the omega-hydroxylase in the inflammation process .
CIKS, a connection to Ikappa B kinase and stress-activated protein kinase.
Pathogens , inflammatory signals , and stress cause acute transcriptional responses in cells .
The induced expression of genes in response to these signals invariably involves transcription factors of the NF-kappaB and AP-1 \/ ATF families .
Activation of NF-kappaB factors is thought to be mediated primarily via IkappaB kinases ( IKK ) , whereas that of AP-1 \/ ATF can be mediated by stress-activated protein kinases ( SAPKs ; also named Jun kinases or JNKs ) .
IKKalpha and IKKbeta are two catalytic subunits of a core IKK complex that also contains the regulatory subunit NEMO ( NF-kappaB essential modulator ) \/ IKKgamma .
The latter protein is essential for activation of the IKKs , but its mechanism of action is not known .
Here we describe the molecular cloning of CIKS ( connection to IKK and SAPK\/JNK ) , a previously unknown protein that directly interacts with NEMO\/IKKgamma in cells .
When ectopically expressed , CIKS stimulates IKK and SAPK\/JNK kinases and it transactivates an NF-kappaB-dependent reporter .
Activation of NF-kappaB is prevented in the presence of kinase-deficient , interfering mutants of the IKKs .
CIKS may help to connect upstream signaling events to IKK and SAPK\/JNK modules .
CIKS could coordinate the activation of two stress-induced signaling pathways , functions reminiscent of those noted for tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor adaptor proteins .
Molecular cloning of a cDNA for human delta-aminolevulinate dehydratase.
A cDNA encoding human delta-aminolevulinic acid dehydratase ( ALA-D ; EC 4.2.1.24 ) , the second enzyme in the heme biosynthetic pathway , was isolated from a human liver cDNA expression library .
Of the original 17 clones selected with anti-ALA-D antibody , only four expressed anti-ALA-D epitopes as assessed by rescreening with antibody preabsorbed with purified antigen .
Subsequent screening of the antibody-positive clones with mixed oligodeoxynucleotide ( oligo ) probes , synthesized to correspond to human N-terminal and bovine active-site peptide sequences , identified three clones which hybridized only with the oligo probes for the bovine amino acid ( aa ) sequences .
Restriction endonucleases analysis revealed that these three clones contained the same 800-bp cDNA insert .
This insert was recloned into bacteriophage M13mp18 and mp19 and sequenced by primer extension .
The aa sequence predicted from the partial nucleotide sequence was found to be essentially colinear with the sequences of four bovine ALA-D peptides , totaling 35 non-overlapping aa residues .
Cloning, expression and chromosomal location of NKX6B TO 10Q26, a region frequently deleted in brain tumors.
Nkx6-2 ( former Gtx ) is a murine-homeobox-containing gene localized distally on Chromosome ( Chr ) 7 .
Analysis of the expression pattern , together with DNA binding assays , suggests that this gene product might be important for differentiated oligodendrocyte function and in the regulation of myelin gene expression .
We now report on the cloning and characterization of the human homolog ( NKX6B ) .
DNA sequence analysis of an 11-kb genomic fragment revealed that the complete human gene spans 1.2 kb and is composed of three exons .
NKX6B is predicted to encode a polypeptide of 277 amino acids with 97 % identity to mouse Nkx6-2 .
Northern blot experiments showed that NKX6B expression is tightly controlled in a tissue-specific fashion with the highest site of expression being the brain .
Finally , using STS content mapping and RH analyis , we demonstrated that NKX6B maps to the 10q26 , a region where frequent loss of heterozygosity has been observed in various malignant brain tumors .
These results may implicate NKX6B as a candidate tumor suppressor gene for brain tumors , particularly for oligodendrogliomas .
The immunoreactive region in a novel autoantigen contains a nuclear localization sequence.
Antibodies in the serum of patients with autoimmune diseases have been used to identify human autoantigens .
Because autoantibodies often recognize active sites within corresponding protein antigens , autoantibodies have facilitated the functional characterization of these polypeptides .
In the present study , serum from a patient with Sjögren 's syndrome was used to identify a novel autoantigen which was designated Ge-1 .
Using the patient 's serum , a 4.8-kb cDNA encoding Ge-1 was identified .
Fragments of the cDNA were ligated into prokaryotic expression vectors , expressed in Escherichia coli , and used to produce recombinant Ge-1 fusion proteins .
Fusion proteins containing different portions of Ge-1 were used to identify a 58 amino acid immunoreactive region within the protein .
This immunoreactive region contained the protein 's putative nuclear localization sequence ( NLS ) .
To demonstrate that the immunoreactive region was capable of functioning as a NLS , a eukaryotic expression plasmid was constructed to encode the immunoreactive region fused to the cytoplasmic protein , chicken muscle pyruvate kinase .
After transfection of this plasmid into COS-1 cells , the fusion protein was detected in the nucleus .
The presence of the NLS motif within the immunoreactive region of Ge-1 and other nuclear autoantigens suggests that the NLS may be a target of human autoantibodies .
BMX, a novel nonreceptor tyrosine kinase gene of the BTK/ITK/TEC/TXK family located in chromosome Xp22.2.
The Bmx sequence was identified and cloned during our search for novel tyrosine kinase genes expressed in human bone marrow cells .
Bmx cDNA comprises a long open reading frame of 675 amino acids , containing one SH3 , one SH2 and one tyrosine kinase domain , which are about 70 % identical with Btk , Itk and Tec and somewhat less with Txk tyrosine kinase sequences .
The amino terminal sequences of these four tyrosine kinases are about 40 % identical and each contains a so-called pleckstrin homology domain .
The 2.7 kb Bmx mRNA was expressed in endothelial cells and several human tissues by Northern blotting and an 80 kD Bmx polypeptide was detected in human endothelial cells .
Immunoprecipitates of COS cells transfected with a Bmx expression vector and NIH3T3 cells expressing a Bmx retrovirus contained a tyrosyl phosphorylated Bmx polypeptide of similar molecular weight .
The BMX gene was located in chromosomal band Xp22 .2 between the DXS197 and DXS207 loci .
Interestingly , chromosome X also contains the closest relative of BMX , the BTK gene , implicated in X-linked agammaglobulinemia .
The BMX gene thus encodes a novel nonreceptor tyrosine kinase , which may play a role in the growth and differentiation of hematopoietic cells .
X-linked IAP is a direct inhibitor of cell-death proteases.
The inhibitor-of-apoptosis ( IAP ) family of genes has an evolutionarily conserved role in regulating programmed cell death in animals ranging from insects to humans .
Ectopic expression of human IAP proteins can suppress cell death induced by a variety of stimuli , but the mechanism of this inhibition was previously unknown .
Here we show that human X-chromosome-linked IAP directly inhibits at least two members of the caspase family of cell-death proteases , caspase-3 and caspase-7 .
As the caspases are highly conserved throughout the animal kingdom and are the principal effectors of apoptosis , our findings suggest how IAPs might inhibit cell death , providing evidence for a mechanism of action for these mammalian cell-death suppressors .
Identification of the gene responsible for Best macular dystrophy.
Best macular dystrophy ( BMD ) , also known as vitelliform macular dystrophy ( VMD2 ; OMIM 153700 ) , is an autosomal dominant form of macular degeneration characterized by an abnormal accumulation of lipofuscin within and beneath the retinal pigment epithelium cells .
In pursuit of the disease gene , we limited the minimum genetic region by recombination breakpoint analysis and mapped to this region a novel retina-specific gene ( VMD2 ) .
Genetic mapping data , identification of five independent disease-specific mutations and expression studies provide evidence that mutations within the candidate gene are a cause of BMD .
The 3 ' UTR of the candidate gene contains a region of antisense complementarity to the 3 ' UTR of the ferritin heavy-chain gene ( FTH1 ) , indicating the possibility of antisense interaction between VMD2 and FTH1 transcripts .
Interaction between LIS1 and doublecortin, two lissencephaly gene products.
Mutations in either LIS1 or DCX are the most common cause for type I lissencephaly .
Here we report that LIS1 and DCX interact physically both in vitro and in vivo .
Epitope-tagged DCX transiently expressed in COS cells can be co-immunoprecipitated with endogenous LIS1 .
Furthermore , endogenous DCX could be co-immunoprecipitated with endogenous LIS1 in embryonic brain extracts , demonstrating an in vivo association .
The two protein products also co-localize in transfected cells and in primary neuronal cells .
In addition , we demonstrate homodimerization of DCX in vitro .
Using fragments of both LIS1 and DCX , the domains of interaction were mapped .
LIS1 and DCX interact with tubulin and microtubules .
Our results suggest that addition of DCX and LIS1 to tubulin enhances polymerization in an additive fashion .
In in vitro competition assays , when LIS1 is added first , DCX competes with LIS1 in its binding to microtubules , but when DCX is added prior to the addition of LIS1 it enhances the binding of LIS1 to microtubules .
We conclude that LIS1 and DCX cross-talk is important to microtubule function in the developing cerebral cortex .
The pro-alpha3(V) collagen chain. Complete primary structure, expression domains in adult and developing tissues, and comparison to the structures and expression domains of the other types V and XI procollagen chains.
The low abundance fibrillar collagen type V is widely distributed in tissues as an alpha1 ( V ) ( 2 ) alpha2 ( V ) heterotrimer that helps regulate the diameters of fibrils of the abundant collagen type I. Mutations in the alpha1 ( V ) and alpha2 ( V ) chain genes have been identified in some cases of classical Ehlers-Danlos syndrome ( EDS ) , in which aberrant collagen fibrils are associated with connective tissue fragility , particularly in skin and joints .
Type V collagen also exists as an alpha1 ( V ) alpha2 ( V ) alpha3 ( V ) heterotrimer that has remained poorly characterized chiefly due to inability to obtain the complete primary structure or nucleic acid probes for the alpha3 ( V ) chain or its biosynthetic precursor , pro-alpha3 ( V ) .
Here we provide human and mouse full-length pro-alpha3 ( V ) sequences .
Pro-alpha3 ( V ) is shown to be closely related to the alpha1 ( V ) precursor , pro-alpha1 ( V ) , but with marked differences in N-propeptide sequences , and collagenous domain features that provide insights into the low melting temperature of alpha1 ( V ) alpha2 ( V ) alpha3 ( V ) heterotrimers , lack of heparin binding by alpha3 ( V ) chains and the possibility that alpha1 ( V ) alpha2 ( V ) alpha3 ( V ) heterotrimers are incorporated into heterotypic fibrils .
In situ hybridization of mouse embryos detects alpha3 ( V ) expression primarily in the epimysial sheaths of developing muscles and within nascent ligaments adjacent to forming bones and in joints .
This distribution , and the association of alpha1 ( V ) , alpha2 ( V ) , and alpha3 ( V ) chains in heterotrimers , suggests the human alpha3 ( V ) gene COL5A3 as a candidate locus for at least some cases of classical EDS in which the alpha1 ( V ) and alpha2 ( V ) genes have been excluded , and for at least some cases of the hypermobility type of EDS , a condition marked by gross joint laxity and chronic musculoskeletal pain .
COL5A3 is mapped to 19p13 .2 near a polymorphic marker that should be useful in analyzing linkage with EDS and other disease phenotypes .
Identification of a human follicular dendritic cell molecule that stimulates germinal center B cell growth.
The initial interaction between B cells and follicular dendritic cells ( FDCs ) appears to be essential for germinal center ( GC ) formation .
To identify molecules regulating this interaction , we generated FDC-staining monoclonal antibodies ( mAbs ) and screened them for their ability to block FDC-mediated costimulation of growth and differentiation of CD40-stimulated B cells .
Using one of the inhibitory mAbs , 8D6 , we expression cloned the cDNA encoding the 8D6 antigen ( Ag ) from a human FDC line , HK .
The 8D6 Ag is a novel protein of 282 amino acids that is expressed abundantly on FDCs .
Monolayers of COS cells transiently transfected with the 8D6 Ag cDNA stimulate B cell growth .
The mAb 8D6 blocks the costimulatory function completely .
The inhibitory activity of the mAb 8D6 was demonstrated to be due to an inhibition of cell cycle progression of CD40 ligand-stimulated GC B cells .
In addition , the mAb 8D6 inhibits the growth of a lymphoma of GC origin , L3055 , which depends on FDCs or HK cells for its growth .
These findings suggest that the primary function of FDCs in the GC is to stimulate B cell growth .
An FDC signal molecule , 8D6 Ag , may be an important molecule to mediate this function .
Protocadherin LKC, a new candidate for a tumor suppressor of colon and liver cancers, its association with contact inhibition of cell proliferation.
Protocadherins are a major subfamily of the cadherin superfamily , but little is known about their functions and intracellular signal transduction .
We cloned a novel human protocadherin gene , containing seven EC domains , and identified functional aspects of this gene .
The gene was predominantly expressed in liver , kidney and colon tissues , and was thus designated Protocadherin LKC .
The expression of Protocadherin LKC is markedly reduced in cancers arising from these tissues at both transcriptional and protein levels .
To investigate the effects of Protocadherin LKC expression in colon cancer , we introduced the gene into colon cancer cell line HCT116 , which does not express this gene .
Significantly , Protocadherin LKC expression induced contact inhibition of cell proliferation although it did not affect growth rate .
When grown to post-confluence in monolayer cells cultures , Protocadherin LKC-expressing HCT116 no longer formed multiple cell layers and showed the typical paving stone morphology of normal epithelial cells .
Furthermore , expression of Protocadherin LKC suppressed tumor formation of HCT116 cells in a nude mouse model .
In addition , we identified a protein , hMAST205 ( microtubule-associated serine\/threonine kinase-205 kDa ) , which interacted with Protocadherin LKC ; the interaction occurring between the PDZ domain of hMAST205 and C-terminal tail of Protocadherin LKC .
Our results suggest that Protocadherin LKC , which directly binds PDZ protein , is a molecular switch for contact inhibition of epithelial cells in the liver , kidney and colon tissues .
Analysis of APAF-1 expression in human cutaneous melanoma progression.
APAF-1 plays a pivotal role in mitochondria-dependent apoptosis , binding to cytochrome c and favoring activation of caspase-9 .
It has been shown that epigenetic silencing of the APAF-1 gene is a common event in several metastatic melanoma cells in vitro .
We determined , by Western blot , variation in the level of expression of APAF-1 in several human melanoma cell lines and , by immunohistochemistry , in a group of 106 histological samples including benign and malignant melanocytic lesions .
We observed APAF-1 down-regulation or loss of expression in two metastatic melanoma cell lines , compared to primary melanoma cell lines .
The immunohistochemical analysis revealed a significant difference in APAF-1 staining between nevi and melanomas .
In addition , we found a significant negative correlation between APAF-1 expression level and tumor thickness and between primary melanomas and metastases .
We conclude that loss of APAF-1 expression can be considered as an indicator of malignant transformation in melanoma .
A cap-binding protein complex mediating U snRNA export.
Cap structures are added cotranscriptionally to all RNA polymerase II transcripts .
They affect several processes including RNA stability , pre-messenger RNA splicing , RNA export from the nucleus and translation initiation .
The effect of the cap on translation is mediated by the initiation factor eIF-4F , whereas the effect on pre-mRNA splicing involves a nuclear complex ( CBC ) composed of two cap binding proteins , CBP80 and CBP20 .
A role for CBC in the nuclear export of capped RNAs has also been proposed .
We report here the characterization of human and Xenopus CBP20s .
Antibodies against recombinant CBP20 prevent interaction of CBC with capped RNAs in vitro .
Following microinjection into Xenopus oocytes , the antibodies inhibit both pre-mRNA splicing and export of U small nuclear RNAs to the cytoplasm .
These results demonstrate that CBC mediates the effect of the cap structure in U snRNA export , and provide direct evidence for the involvement of a cellular RNA-binding factor in the transport of RNA to the cytoplasm .
Human liver nicotinamide N-methyltransferase. cDNA cloning, expression, and biochemical characterization.
Nicotinamide N-methyltransferase ( NNMT ) catalyzes the N-methylation of nicotinamide and other pyridines .
Human liver NNMT activity has a bimodal frequency distribution , an observation which raises the possibility that this enzyme activity might be regulated by a genetic polymorphism , a polymorphism that could have functional implications for individual differences in drug and xenobiotic toxicity .
As a first step toward testing that hypothesis , we set out to clone and express a cDNA for human liver NNMT .
Human liver NNMT was partially purified , photoaffinity-labeled , subjected to limited proteolysis , and partial amino acid sequence information was obtained .
The polymerase chain reaction was then used to amplify a 550-nucleotide sequence with human liver cDNA as template and primers designed on the basis of the NNMT amino acid sequence .
The 5 ' - and 3 ' - ends of a human liver NNMT cDNA were obtained by use of the rapid amplification of cDNA ends .
The combined use of these approaches resulted in the isolation of a human liver NNMT cDNA that was 969 nucleotides in length , with a 792-nucleotide open reading frame that encoded a 264-amino acid protein with a calculated molecular mass of 29.6 kDa .
The human liver NNMT cDNA was transcribed in vitro and translated with a reticulocyte lysate system to yield a protein with a molecular mass of approximately 29 kDa that comigrated during SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis with photoaffinity-labeled human liver NNMT .
The NNMT cDNA was also subcloned into the eukaryotic expression vector p91023 ( B ) .
COS-1 cells transfected with this construct expressed a high level of NNMT enzymatic activity , and the biochemical properties of this activity were similar to those of human liver NNMT .
Human liver NNMT and transfected COS-1 cell NNMT had apparent Km values for the two cosubstrates for the reaction , nicotinamide and S-adenosyl-L-methionine , of 0.43 and 0.38 mM and of 1.8 and 2.2 microM , respectively .
IC50 values for the inhibition of NNMT by N1-methylnicotinamide were 60 and 30 microns for human liver and COS-1 cell-expressed NNMT , respectively .
Cloning of a cDNA for human liver NNMT will help make it possible to test the hypothesis that inheritance may play a role in the regulation of individual differences in human liver NNMT activity .
HIV-1 gp120- and gp160-induced apoptosis in cultured endothelial cells is mediated by caspases.
The immune dysfunction and cell destruction that occur in the human immunodeficiency virus ( HIV ) - infected host appear to result from the direct cytopathic effects of viral infection and the effects of viral proteins on uninfected bystander cells .
Recently , the alpha-chemokine receptor CXCR4 has been reported to mediate apoptosis in neuronal cells and in CD4 ( + ) and CD8 ( + ) T cells after its binding to HIV-1 envelope proteins .
In the current study , it was observed that human umbilical vein endothelial cells ( HUVEC ) undergo apoptosis after their treatment with the HIV-1 envelope proteins gp120\/160 .
Anti-CXCR4 monoclonal antibody decreased HIV-1 gp120\/160-induced apoptosis , suggesting that the CXCR4 chemokine receptor mediates the apoptotic effects of these HIV envelope glycoproteins .
Further studies revealed that caspases play an important role in this process because the pretreatment of cells with a general caspase enzyme inhibitor decreased the extent of HUVEC apoptosis induced by gp120\/160 .
In addition , it was found that caspase-3 was activated on HIV-1 gp120\/160 treatment of these cells .
It was also observed that gp120\/160 treatment slightly increased the expression of the pro-apoptotic molecule Bax .
These results suggest that HIV-1 envelope glycoproteins can disrupt endothelial integrity through the interaction with CXCR4 , thereby facilitating virus transit out of the bloodstream and contributing to the vascular injury syndromes seen in acquired immunodeficiency syndrome .
( Blood .
2000 ; 96:1438 -1442 )
A direct repeat in the cellular retinol-binding protein type II gene confers differential regulation by RXR and RAR.
The vitamin A derivative retinoic acid exerts its effects on transcription through two distinct classes of nuclear receptors , the retinoic acid receptor ( RAR ) and the retinoid X receptor ( RXR ) .
We provide evidence that expression of the gene for cellular retinol-binding protein type II ( CRBPII ) , a key protein in the intestinal absorption of vitamin A , is dramatically up-regulated by retinoic acid in the presence of RXR but not RAR .
This regulation is conferred through a specific cis element in the CRBPII promoter that contains five nearly perfect tandem repeats of the sequence AGGTCA spaced by a single nucleotide .
The discovery of this new RX response element provides a means for distinguishing between the two retinoid receptor systems and suggests that an RXR-mediated pathway exists for modulating vitamin A metabolism .
Cloning and antisense oligodeoxynucleotide inhibition of a human homolog of cdc2 required in hematopoiesis.
Mechanisms triggering the commitment of pluripotent bone marrow stem cells to differentiated lineages such as mononuclear macrophages or multinucleated megakaryocytes are still unknown , although several lines of evidence suggested correlation between cholinergic signaling and hematopoietic differentiation .
We now present cloning of a cDNA coding for CHED ( cholinesterase-related cell division controller ) , a human homolog of the Schizosaccharomyces pombe cell division cycle 2 ( cdc2 ) - like kinases , universal controllers of the mitotic cell cycle .
Library screening , RNA blot hybridization , and direct PCR amplification of cDNA reverse-transcribed from cellular mRNA revealed that CHED mRNA is expressed in multiple tissues , including bone marrow .
The CHED protein includes the consensus ATP binding and phosphorylation domains characteristic of kinases , displays 34-42 % identically aligned amino acid residues with other cdc2-related kinases , and is considerably longer at its amino and carboxyl termini .
An antisense oligodeoxynucleotide designed to interrupt CHED 's expression ( AS-CHED ) significantly reduced the ratio between CHED mRNA and actin mRNA within 1 hr of its addition to cultures , a reduction that persisted for 4 days .
AS-CHED treatment selectively inhibited megakaryocyte development in murine bone marrow cultures but did not prevent other hematopoietic pathways , as evidenced by increasing numbers of mononuclear cells .
An oligodeoxynucleotide blocking production of the acetylcholine-hydrolyzing enzyme , butyrylcholinesterase , displayed a similar inhibition of megakaryocytopoiesis .
In contrast , an oligodeoxynucleotide blocking production of the human 2Hs cdc2 homolog interfered with production of the human 2Hs cdc2 homolog interfered with cellular proliferation without altering the cell-type composition of these cultures .
Therefore , these findings strengthen the link between cholinergic signaling and cell division control in hematopoiesis and implicate both CHED and cholinesterases in this differentiation process .
Genomic binding-site cloning reveals an estrogen-responsive gene that encodes a RING finger protein.
Estrogen receptor ( ER ) - binding fragments were isolated from human genomic DNA by using a recombinant ER protein .
Using one of these fragments as a probe , we have identified an estrogen-responsive gene that encodes a putative zinc finger protein .
It has a RING finger motif present in a family of apparent DNA-binding proteins and is designated estrogen-responsive finger protein ( efp ) .
efp cDNA contains a consensus estrogen-responsive element at the 3 ' untranslated region that can act as a downstream estrogen-dependent enhancer .
Moreover , efp is regulated by estrogen as demonstrated at both the mRNA and the protein level in ER-positive cells derived from mammary gland .
These data suggest that efp may represent an estrogen-responsive transcription factor that mediates phenotypic expression of the diverse estrogen action .
Thus , the genomic binding-site cloning may be applicable for isolation of the target genes of other transcription factors .
Identification of a protein with homology to hsp90 that binds the type 1 tumor necrosis factor receptor.
The yeast-based two hybrid has been used to identify a novel protein that binds to the intracellular domain of the type 1 receptor for tumor necrosis factor ( TNFR-1IC ) .
The TNF receptor-associated protein , TRAP-1 , shows strong homology to members of the 90-kDa family of heat shock proteins .
After in vitro transcription\/translation and 35S labeling , TRAP-1 was precipitated using a fusion protein consisting of glutathione S-transferase and TNFR-1IC , showing that the two proteins directly interact .
The ability of deletion mutants of TNFR-1 to interact with TRAP-1 was tested using the two hybrid system .
This showed that the amino acid sequences that mediate binding are diffusely distributed outside of the domain in the C terminus of TNFR-1IC that signals cytotoxicity .
The 2.4-kilobase TRAP-1 mRNA was variably expressed in skeletal muscle , liver , heart , brain , kidney , pancreas , lung , and placenta .
TRAP-1 mRNA was also detected in each of eight different transformed cell lines .
Identification of TRAP-1 may be an important step toward defining how TNFR-1 , which does not contain protein tyrosine kinase activity , transmits its message to signal transduction pathways .
cDNA cloning of human allograft inflammatory factor-1: tissue distribution, cytokine induction, and mRNA expression in injured rat carotid arteries.
We have previously identified a partial cDNA fragment obtained from rat carotid arteries subject to balloon angioplasty which is increased in response to vascular injury .
We now report the isolation and characterization of a full length human clone which is 98 % homologous at the amino acid level to the rat .
Allograft Inflammatory Factor-1 ( AIF-1 ) , a gene previously reported to be expressed in rat IFN gamma-activated macrophages .
This transcript is expressed in low levels in undamaged , and increases 1 day and 3 days , and declines 7 days post balloon angioplasty .
This human AIF-1 homolog is inducible in serum and cytokine-stimulated human smooth muscle cells .
Interestingly , human tissue distribution indicates a constitutive expression in lymphoid tissue which can be augmented by mitogens .
In summary , human AIF represents a cytokine inducible , tissue-specific , and highly conserved transcript transiently expressed in response to vascular trauma .
Autoimmune target in Heymann nephritis is a glycoprotein with homology to the LDL receptor.
The pathogenesis of Heymann nephritis , a rat model of human membranous glomerulonephritis , depends on the interaction of autoantibodies with a renal glycoprotein ( GP330 ) on glomerular podocytes .
Partial complementary DNAs coding for GP330 were isolated and sequenced .
The deduced amino acid sequence from 4.3 kilobases of complementary DNA contains the sequences identical to two peptides derived from the isolated glycoprotein .
The deduced amino acid sequence of this protein contains regions with homology to the human low density lipoprotein ( LDL ) receptor , an indication that GP330 and the LDL receptor may be members of the same gene family .
Autoantibodies from the kidneys of rats with Heymann nephritis reacted with a nonglycosylated segment of GP330 that contains cysteine-rich 40-amino acid repeats , which are also features of the LDL receptor .
GP330 is also similar in some regions to the mouse epidermal growth factor precursor .
Expression cloning of a cDNA encoding UDP-GlcNAc:Gal beta 1-3-GalNAc-R (GlcNAc to GalNAc) beta 1-6GlcNAc transferase by gene transfer into CHO cells expressing polyoma large tumor antigen.
A cDNA encoding UDP-GlcNAc : Gal beta 1-3GalNAc-R ( GlcNAc to GalNAc ) beta 1-6GlcNAc transferase ( EC 2.4.1.102 ) , which forms critical branches in O-glycans , has been isolated by an expression cloning approach using Chinese hamster ovary ( CHO ) cells .
Increased activity of this enzyme and the concomitant occurrence of the O-glycan core 2 structure ( Gal beta 1-3 ( GlcNAc beta 1-6 ) GalNAc ) has been observed in a variety of biological processes , such as T-cell activation and immunodeficiency due to the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome and AIDS .
Since CHO cells do not express this enzyme , CHO cell lines were established to stably express polyoma large tumor ( T ) antigen , which enables transient expression cloning .
Because the antibody used was found to detect most efficiently the oligosaccharide products attached to leukosialin , the CHO cells were also stably transfected with leukosialin cDNA .
By using this particular CHO cell line , a cDNA that encodes a protein determining the formation of the core 2 structure was isolated from an HL-60 cDNA library .
The cDNA sequence predicts a protein with type II membrane topology , as has been found for all other mammalian glycosyltransferases cloned to date .
The expression of the presumed catalytic domain as a fusion protein with the IgG binding domain of protein A enabled us to demonstrate unequivocally that the cDNA encodes the core 2 beta-1 ,6 - N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase , the enzyme responsible for the formation of Gal beta 1-3 ( GlcNAc beta 1-6 ) GalNAc structures .
No activity with this enzyme was detected toward the acceptors for other beta 1-6GlcNAc transferases .
DNA sequence and muscle-specific expression of human sarcosin transcripts.
We have characterized two abundant human cDNAs which , through Northern hybridization analysis , are selectively expressed in human sarcomeric muscle .
DNA sequencing was performed and the two cDNAs were found to share sequence identity , with the exception of a 3 ' UTR extension present on the longer transcript .
Our data suggest that the two transcripts are generated through alternative use of two poly ( A ) addition signals .
The cDNAs encode a large open reading frame encompassing at least 435 codons .
Through sequence comparisons , both at the DNA and predicted amino acid sequence level , we have been unable to find significant sequence similarity to any other characterized sequence .
Consequently , we have termed this novel human sequence sarcosin .
Although novel , Southern hybridization analysis demonstrated that the sarcosin sequence has been conserved in several mammalian species .
Identification of a common protein association region in the neuronal Cdk5 activator.
Cyclin-dependent protein kinase 5 ( Cdk5 ) depends on the association with neuronal Cdk5 activator ( Nck5a ) for kinase activity .
A variety of cellular proteins have been shown to undergo high affinity association with Nck5a , including three novel proteins , C42 , C48 , and C53 found by a yeast two-hybrid screen ( Ching , Y. P. , Qi , Z. , and Wang , J. H. ( 2000 ) Gene 242 , 285-294 ) .
The three proteins show competitive binding to Nck5a suggesting that they bind at a common site .
The binding site has been mapped to a region of 26 amino acid residues ( residues 145 to 170 ) at the N-terminal boundary of the kinase activation domain of Nck5a .
This region of Nck5a contains an amphipathic alpha-helix whose hydrophobic face is involved in Cdk5 activation ( Chin , K. T. , Ohki , S , Tang , D. , Cheng , H. C. , Wang , J. H. , and Zhang , M. ( 1999 ) J. Biol .
Chem .
274 , 7120-7127 ) .
Several lines of evidence suggest that Nck5a interacts with the binding proteins at the hydrophilic face of the amphipathic alpha-helix .
First , the Nck5a - ( 145-170 ) peptide can bind Cdk5 and Nck5a-binding proteins simultaneously .
Second , the association of Nck5a - ( 145-170 ) to C48 can be markedly reduced by high ionic strength whereas the interaction between Nck5a and Cdk5 is not affected .
Third , substitution of Glu ( 157 ) by glutamine in Nck5a - ( 145-170 ) abolishes the peptide 's ability to bind to the three Nck5a-binding proteins without diminishing its Cdk5 binding activity .
Two human homeobox genes, c1 and c8: structure analysis and expression in embryonic development.
Two human cDNA clones ( HHO .
c1 .95 and HHO .
c8 .5111 ) containing a homeobox region have been characterized , and the respective genomic regions have been partially analyzed .
Expression of the corresponding genes , termed c1 and c8 , was evaluated in different organs and body parts during human embryonic\/fetal development .
HHO .
c1 .95 apparently encodes a 217-amino acid protein containing a class I homeodomain that shares 60 out of 61 amino acid residues with the Antennapedia homeodomain of Drosophila melanogaster .
HHO .
c8 .5111 encodes a 153-amino acid protein containing a homeodomain identical to that of the frog AC1 gene .
Clones HHO .
c1 and HHO .
c8 detect by blot-hydridization one and two specific polyadenylylated transcripts , respectively .
These are differentially expressed in spinal cord , backbone rudiments , limb buds ( or limbs ) , heart , and skin of human embryos and early fetuses in the 5 - to 9-week postfertilization period , thus suggesting that the c1 and c8 genes play a key role in a variety of developmental processes .
Together , the results of the embryonic\/fetal expression of c1 and c8 and those of two previously analyzed genes ( c10 and c13 ) indicate a coherent pattern of expression of these genes in early human ontogeny .
Cloning and characterization of human urocortin.
Urocortin , a new member of the CRF peptide family which also includes urotensin I and sauvagine , was recently cloned from the rat midbrain .
The synthetic replicate of urocortin was found to bind with high affinity to type 1 and type 2 CRF receptors and , based upon its anatomic localization within the brain , was proposed to be a natural ligand for the type 2 CRF receptors .
Using a genomic library , we have cloned the human counterpart of rat urocortin and localized it to human chromosome 2 .
Human and rat urocortin share 95 % identity within the mature peptide region .
Synthetic human urocortin binds with high affinity to CRF receptor types 1 , 2 alpha , and 2 beta , stimulates cAMP accumulation from cells stably transfected with these receptors , and acts in vitro to release ACTH from dispersed rat anterior pituitary cells .
In addition , the CRF-binding protein binds human urocortin with high affinity and can prevent urocortin-stimulated ACTH secretion in vitro .
The inhibitory effect of the CRF-binding protein on human urocortin can be blocked by biologically inactive CRF fragments , such as CRF ( 9-33 ) .
Functional expression and pharmacological characterization of the human EAA4 (GluR6) glutamate receptor: a kainate selective channel subunit.
A cDNA encoding an ionotropic glutamate receptor subunit protein humEAA4 ( GluR6 ) , has been cloned from a human fetal brain library .
This cDNA when expressed in COS or HEK-293 cells is associated with high-affinity kainate receptor binding and ion channel formation .
We have successfully established cell lines stably expressing humEAA4 in HEK-293 cells This is the first report of the establishment of stable cell lines expressing a glutamate receptor channel .
The relative potency of compounds for displacing ( 3H ) - kainate binding to humEAA4 receptors expressed in COS or HEK-293 cells is domoate ) kainate ) quisqualate ) 6-cyano-7-nitroquinoxaline-2 ,3 - dione ) L-glutamate = 6,7 - dinitroquinoxaline-2 ,3 - dione ) dihydrokainate .
Applications of kainate , glutamate , and domoate but not AMPA evoked rapidly desensitizing currents in cells expressing homo-oligomeric humEAA4 in a concentration dependent manner .
The order of potency was : domoate ) kainate ) L-glutamate .
Although AMPA did not itself activate humEAA4 receptors it did reduce , to a limited extent , kainate-evoked responses .
AMPA may therefore be a weak partial agonist for this receptor .
To date this effect has not been demonstrated with rat GluR6 .
It is possible that subtle species differences may exist in the nature of agonist receptor interaction .
Kainate evoked currents were attenuated by the quinoxalinediones CNQX and DNQX but not by DAP5 .
The receptor desensitization was attenuated on application of concanavalin A. Ion-permeability studies indicated that the receptor-linked ion channel is permeable to both Na + and Ca2 + ions .
Molecular cloning and functional expression of the gene encoding the human proteinase-activated receptor 2.
We previously reported the molecular cloning of a mouse guanosine-nucleotide-binding-protein-coupled receptor similar to the thrombin receptor .
Since the physiological agonist was unknown , the receptor was named proteinase-activated receptor 2 .
We describe here the cloning and functional expression of the gene encoding the corresponding human receptor .
The gene is divided into two exons separated by about 14 kb intronic DNA .
The deduced protein sequence is 397 amino acids long and 83 % identical to the mouse receptor sequence .
Within the extracellular amino terminus , the residues predicted to form the tethered agonist ligand differ between the two receptors ; of the first six residues only four are conserved .
At positions five and six , a lysine residue and a valine residue , respectively , have replaced arginine and leucine residues found in the mouse sequence .
When the human receptor is expressed in Chinese hamster ovary cells , it can be activated by low nanomolar concentrations of the serine proteinase trypsin and by peptides made from the receptor sequence .
Northern-blot analysis of receptor expression showed that the receptor transcript is widely expressed in human tissues with especially high levels in pancreas , liver , kidney , small intestine and colon .
Moderate expression was detected in many organs but none in brain or skeletal muscle .
By fluorescence in situ hybridization , the human proteinase-activated receptor 2 gene was mapped to chromosomal region 5q13 , where , previously , the related thrombin receptor gene has been located .
PHOG, a candidate gene for involvement in the short stature of Turner syndrome.
The abnormalities seen in Turner syndrome ( monosomy X ) presumably result from haploinsufficiency of certain genes on the X chromosome .
Gene dosage considerations lead to the prediction that the culpable genes escape X inactivation and have functional homologs on the Y chromosome .
Among the genes with these characteristics are those residing in the pseudoautosomal regions ( PAR ) of the sex chromosomes .
A pseudoautosomal location for a dosage-sensitive locus involved in stature has been suggested based on the analyses of patients with deletions of a specific segment of the short arm PAR ; hemizygosity for this putative locus probably also contributes to the short stature in Turner individuals .
We have isolated a gene from the critical deleted region that encodes a novel homeodomain-containing transcription factor and is expressed at highest levels in osteogenic cells .
We have named the gene PHOG , for pseudoautosomal homeobox-containing osteogenic gene .
Its deletion in patients with short stature , the predicted altered dosage in 45 , X individuals , along with the nature of the encoded protein and its expression pattern , make PHOG an attractive candidate for involvement in the short stature of Turner syndrome .
We have also found that the mouse homolog of PHOG is autosomal , which may help to explain the lack of a growth abnormality in mice with monosomy X.
Interleukin-2 receptor beta chain gene: generation of three receptor forms by cloned human alpha and beta chain cDNA's.
Interleukin-2 ( IL-2 ) binds to two distinct receptor molecules , the IL-2 receptor alpha ( IL-2R alpha , p55 ) chain and the newly identified IL-2 receptor beta ( IL-2R beta , p70-75 ) chain .
The cDNA encoding the human IL-2R beta chain has now been isolated .
The overall primary structure of the IL-2R beta chain shows no apparent homology to other known receptors .
Unlike the IL-2R alpha chain , the IL-2R beta chain has a large cytoplasmic region in which a functional domain ( or domains ) mediating an intracellular signal transduction pathway ( or pathways ) may be embodied .
The cDNA-encoded beta chain binds and internalizes IL-2 when expressed on T lymphoid cells but not fibroblast cells .
Furthermore , the cDNA gives rise to the generation of high-affinity IL-2 receptor when co-expressed with the IL-2R alpha chain cDNA .
Alpha(2) adrenoceptors regulate proliferation of human intestinal epithelial cells.
BACKGROUND AND AIMS : Previous studies on rodents have suggested that catecholamines stimulate proliferation of the intestinal epithelium through activation of alpha ( 2 ) adrenoceptors located on crypt cells .
The occurrence of this effect awaits demonstration in humans and the molecular mechanisms involved have not yet been elucidated .
Here , we examined the effect of alpha ( 2 ) agonists on a clone of Caco2 cells expressing the human alpha ( 2A ) adrenoceptor .
METHODS : Cells were transfected with a bicistronic plasmid containing the alpha2C10 and neomycin phosphotransferase genes .
G418 resistant clones were assayed for receptor expression using radioligand binding .
Receptor functionality was assessed by testing its ability to couple Gi proteins and to inhibit cAMP production .
Mitogen activated protein kinase ( MAPK ) phosphorylation was followed by western blot , and cell proliferation was estimated by measuring protein and DNA content .
RESULTS : Permanent transfection of Caco2 cells allowed us to obtain a clone ( Caco2-3B ) expressing alpha ( 2A ) adrenoceptors at a density similar to that found in normal human intestinal epithelium .
Caco2-3B retained morphological features and brush border enzyme expression characteristic of enterocytic differentiation .
The receptor was coupled to Gi2\/Gi3 proteins and its stimulation caused marked diminution of forskolin induced cAMP production .
Treatment of Caco2-3B with UK14304 ( alpha ( 2 ) agonist ) induced a rapid increase in the phosphorylation state of MAPK , extracellular regulated protein kinase 1 ( Erk1 ) , and 2 ( Erk2 ) .
This event was totally abolished in pertussis toxin treated cells and in the presence of kinase inhibitors ( genistein or PD98059 ) .
It was unaffected by protein kinase C downregulation but correlated with a transient increase in Shc tyrosine phosphorylation .
Finally , sustained exposure of Caco2-3B to UK14304 resulted in modest but significant acceleration of cell proliferation .
None of these effects was observed in the parental cell line Caco2 .
CONCLUSION : The results obtained in the present study support a regulatory role for alpha ( 2 ) adrenoceptors in intestinal cell proliferation .
Glycogenin-2, a novel self-glucosylating protein involved in liver glycogen biosynthesis.
Glycogenin is a self-glucosylating protein involved in the initiation phase of glycogen biosynthesis .
A single mammalian gene had been reported to account for glycogen biogenesis in liver and muscle , the two major repositories of glycogen .
We describe the characterization of novel forms of glycogenin , designated glycogenin-2 ( GN-2 ) , encoded by a second gene that is expressed preferentially in certain tissues , including liver , heart , and pancreas .
Cloning of cDNAs encoding glycogenin-2 indicated the existence of multiple species , including three liver forms ( GN-2alpha , GN-2beta , and GN-2gamma ) generated in part by alternative splicing .
Overall , GN-2 has 40-45 % identity to muscle glycogenin but is 72 % identical over a 200-residue segment thought to contain the catalytic domain .
GN-2 expressed in Escherichia coli or COS cells is active in self-glucosylation assays , and self-glucosylated GN-2 can be elongated by skeletal muscle glycogen synthase .
Antibodies raised against GN-2 produced in E. coli recognized proteins of Mr approximately 66,000 present in extracts of rat liver and in cultured H4IIEC3 hepatoma cells .
In H4IIEC3 cells , most of the GN-2 was present as a free protein but some was covalently associated with glycogen fractions and was only released by treatment with alpha-amylase .
H4IIEC3 cells also expressed the muscle form of glycogenin ( glycogenin-1 ) , which was attached to a chromatographically separable glycogen fraction .
Molecular cloning and characterization of a putative novel human osteoclast-specific 116-kDa vacuolar proton pump subunit.
A cDNA encoding a possible novel human 116-kDa polypeptide subunit of the osteoclastic proton pump ( OC-116KDa ) has been identified by differential screening of a human osteoclastoma cDNA library .
The predicted sequence of OC-116kDa consists of 822 amino acids and is 46.9 % and 47.2 % identical at the amino acid level to the 116-KDa polypeptide of the vacuolar proton pump of rat and bovine brain respectively .
OC-116KDa mRNA was found at high levels in osteoclastomas by Northern analysis but was not detected in tumor stromal cells or in other tissues including kidney , liver , skeletal muscle and brain .
OC-116KDa mRNA was localized to multinucleated giant cells within the osteoclastoma tumor by in situ hybridization .
SOX22 is a new member of the SOX gene family, mainly expressed in human nervous tissue.
SOX ( SRY box-containing ) genes share a particular DNA-binding domain , called HMG , with the mammalian testis-determining gene SRY Several SOX genes have already been shown to be transcription factors involved in the decision of important cell fates during development .
Here we report the cloning of a new human member of the SOX gene family , SOX22 .
The corresponding protein contains several domains that are also present in other paralogous SOX proteins .
The SOX22 gene maps to chromosome 20 on band p13 and does not appear to be clustered with any other SOX gene mapped to date .
SOX22 mRNA is expressed in various fetal and adult organs and tissues , suggesting that this gene plays roles in both differentiation and maintenance of several cell types .
Linkage of the LW blood group locus with the complement C3 and Lutheran blood group loci.
Segregation data on LW in families of informative males show that the LW ( Landsteiner-Wiener ) blood group locus is closely linked to the complement C3 locus and to the locus for the Lutheran blood group .
This finding also confirms the presence of a larger linkage group on chromosome 19 , including now the loci for apoE , Le , C3 , LW , Lu , Se , H , PEPD , myotonic dystrophy ( DM ) , neurofibromatosis ( NF ) and familial hypercholesterolemia ( FHC ) .
Linkage of LW with the Lewis blood group locus could not be definitely established by the present family data , but small positive scores between LW and Le suggest that the Le locus is situated outside the C3-LW region .
Isolation of a full-length human WNT7A gene implicated in limb development and cell transformation, and mapping to chromosome 3p25.
The Wnt gene family has a role in development as well as tumourigenesis .
One mouse member , Wnt7a , is vital for limb development in vivo and also possesses transforming ability in vitro .
This study reports the isolation of a full length of human homolog of mouse Wnt7a gene by library screening .
Yeast artificial chromosome-fluorescence in situ hybridisation ( YAC-FISH ) mapped the WNT7A gene to chromosome 3p25 .
Human WNT7A had an ORF encoding a deduced protein of 349 aa that exhibited 97 % and 92 % identity to mouse Wnt7a at the aa and nucleic acid levels , respectively .
It possessed the 22 conserved cysteine residues and 3 more at the amino terminus , and a putative poly A tail .
This is the fifth human WNT gene in which a complete cDNA sequence had been determined .
Human DNA helicase II: a novel DNA unwinding enzyme identified as the Ku autoantigen.
Human DNA helicase II ( HDH II ) is a novel ATP-dependent DNA unwinding enzyme , purified to apparent homogeneity from HeLa cells , which ( i ) unwinds exclusively DNA duplexes , ( ii ) prefers partially unwound substrates and ( iii ) proceeds in the 3 ' to 5 ' direction on the bound strand .
HDH II is a heterodimer of 72 and 87 kDa polypeptides .
It shows single-stranded DNA-dependent ATPase activity , as well as double-stranded DNA binding capacity .
All these activities comigrate in gel filtration and glycerol gradients , giving a sedimentation coefficient of 7.4 S and a Stokes radius of approximately 46 A , corresponding to a native molecular weight of 158 kDa .
The antibodies raised in rabbit against either polypeptide can remove from the solution all the activities of HDH II .
Photoaffinity labeling with ( alpha-32P ) ATP labeled both polypeptides .
Microsequencing of the separate polypeptides of HDH II and cross-reaction with specific antibodies showed that this enzyme is identical to Ku , an autoantigen recognized by the sera of scleroderma and lupus erythematosus patients , which binds specifically to duplex DNA ends and is regulator of a DNA-dependent protein kinase .
Recombinant HDH II\/Ku protein expressed in and purified from Escherichia coli cells showed DNA binding and helicase activities indistinguishable from those of the isolated protein .
The exclusively nuclear location of HDH II\/Ku antigen , its highly specific affinity for double-stranded DNA , its abundance and its newly demonstrated ability to unwind exclusively DNA duplexes , point to an additional , if still unclear , role for this molecule in DNA metabolism .
Identification of distinct surface-expressed and intracellular CXC-chemokine receptor 2 glycoforms in neutrophils: N-glycosylation is essential for maintenance of receptor surface expression.
The G protein-coupled CXC-chemokine receptor CXCR-2 mediates activation of neutrophil effector functions in response to multiple ligands , including IL-8 and neutrophil-activating peptide 2 ( NAP-2 ) .
Although CXCR-2 has been successfully cloned and expressed in several cell lines , the molecular properties of the native neutrophil-expressed receptor have remained largely undefined .
Here we report on the identification and characterization of distinct CXCR-2 glycoforms and their subcellular distribution in neutrophils .
Immunoprecipitation and Western blot analyses of surface-expressed receptors covalently linked to IL-8 or NAP-2 as well as in their unloaded state revealed the occurrence of a single CXCR-2 variant with an apparent size of 56 kDa .
According to deglycosylation experiments surface-expressed CXCR-2 carries two N-linked 9-kDa carbohydrate moieties that are both of complex structure .
In addition , two other CXCR-2 variants of 38 and 40 kDa were found to occur exclusively intracellular and to carry N-glycosylations of high mannose or hybrid type .
These receptors did not participate in ligand-induced receptor trafficking , while surface-expressed CXCR-2 was internalized and re-expressed following stimulation with NAP-2 .
By enzymatic removal of one 9-kDa carbohydrate moiety in surface-expressed CXCR-2 we can show that neither NAP-2-induced trafficking nor signaling of the receptor is dependent on its full glycosylation .
Instead , glycosylation was found to protect CXCR-2 from proteolytic attack , as even partial deglycosylation is associated with serine protease-mediated disappearance of the receptor from the neutrophil surface .
Thus , although not directly involved in signaling , glycosylation appears to be required to maintain neutrophil responsiveness to CXC-chemokines during inflammation .
Characterization and functional expression of the cDNA encoding human brain quinolinate phosphoribosyltransferase.
Mammalian quinolinate phosphoribosyltransferase ( QPRTase ) ( EC 2.4.2.19 ) is a key enzyme in catabolism of quinolinate , an intermediate in the tryptophan-nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide ( NAD ) pathway .
Quinolinate acts as a most potent endogenous exitotoxin to neurons .
Elevation of quinolinate levels in the brain has been linked to the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative disorders .
As the first step to elucidate molecular basis underlying the quinolinate metabolism , the cDNA encoding human brain QPRTase was cloned and characterized .
Utilizing partial amino acid sequences obtained from highly purified porcine kidney QPRTase , a human isolog was obtained from a human brain cDNA library .
The cDNA encodes a open reading frame of 297 amino acids , and shares 30 to 40 % identity with those of bacterial QPRTases .
To confirm that the cDNA clone encodes human QPRTase , its functional expression was studied in a bacterial host .
Introduction of the human cDNA into a QPRTase defective ( nadC ) E. coli strain brought about an abrupt increase in QPRTase activity and allowed the cells to grow in the absence of nicotinic acid .
It is concluded that the cloned cDNA encodes human QPRTase which is functional beyond the phylogenic boundary .
Association of inhibitory tyrosine protein kinase p50csk with protein tyrosine phosphatase PEP in T cells and other hemopoietic cells.
p50csk is a tyrosine protein kinase ( TPK ) that represses the activity of Src family TPKs .
We previously showed that Csk is a potent negative regulator of antigen receptor signaling in T lymphocytes and that its Src homology ( SH ) 3 and SH2 domains are required to inhibit these signals .
To test the idea that the Csk SH3 and SH2 domains mediate interactions with other cellular proteins , we attempted to identify Csk-associated polypeptides using the yeast two-hybrid system .
The results of our experiments demonstrated that Csk physically associates with PEP , a protein tyrosine phosphatase ( PTP ) expressed in hemopoietic cells .
Further analyses revealed that this interaction was mediated by the Csk SH3 domain and by a proline-rich region ( PPPLPERTP ) in the non-catalytic C-terminal portion of PEP .
The association between Csk and PEP was documented in transiently transfected Cos-1 cells and in a variety of cells of hemopoietic lineages , including T cells .
Additional analyses demonstrated that the association between Csk and PEP is highly specific .
Together , these data indicated that PEP may be an effector and\/or a regulator of p50csk in T cells and other hemopoietic cells .
Moreover , they allowed the identification of PEP as the first known ligand for the Csk SH3 domain .
Maple syrup urine disease. Complete primary structure of the E1 beta subunit of human branched chain alpha-ketoacid dehydrogenase complex deduced from the nucleotide sequence and a gene analysis of patients with this disease.
A defect in the E1 beta subunit of the branched chain alpha-ketoacid dehydrogenase ( BCKDH ) complex is one cause of maple syrup urine disease ( MSUD ) .
In an attempt to elucidate the molecular basis of MSUD , we isolated and characterized a 1.35 kbp cDNA clone encoding the entire precursor of the E1 beta subunit of BCKDH complex from a human placental cDNA library .
Nucleotide sequence analysis revealed that the isolated cDNA clone ( lambda hBE1 beta-1 ) contained a 5 ' - untranslated sequence of four nucleotides , the translated sequence of 1,176 nucleotides and the 3 ' - untranslated sequence of 169 nucleotides .
Comparison of the amino acid sequence predicted from the nucleotide sequence of the cDNA insert of the clone with the NH2-terminal amino acid sequence of the purified mature bovine BCKDH-E1 beta subunit showed that the cDNA insert encodes for a 342-amino acid subunit with a Mr = 37,585 .
The subunit is synthesized as the precursor with a leader sequence of 50 amino acids and is processed at the NH2 terminus .
A search for protein homology revealed that the primary structure of human BCKDH-E1 beta was similar to the bovine BCKDH-E1 beta and to the E1 beta subunit of human pyruvate dehydrogenase complex , in all regions .
The structures and functions of mammalian alpha-ketoacid dehydrogenase complexes are apparently highly conserved .
Genomic DNA from lymphoblastoid cell lines derived from normal and five MSUD patients , in whom E1 beta was not detected by immunoblot analysis , gave the same restriction maps on Southern blot analysis .
The gene has at least 80 kbp .
Human follicle stimulating hormone receptor variants lacking transmembrane domains display altered post-translational conformations.
Variant splicing of gonadotropin receptor mRNA commonly occurs , however expression of receptor protein variants and their trafficking has yet to be studied in detail .
To determine receptor variant trafficking and intracellular processing in mammalian cells , the intracellular fate of intentionally truncated variants of human follicle stimulating hormone receptor ( hFSH-R ) expressed in CHO cells was examined .
Monoclonal antibodies ( mAbs ) were made against the hFSH-R 's extracellular domain ( ECD ) expressed in insect cells .
Four mAbs 106.156 , 106.290 , 106.318 , and 106.263 were chosen as probes .
Epitope mapping using synthetic peptides , and truncated hFSH-R variants revealed that mAb 106.156 bound to ECD residues 183-220 , while mAbs 106.318 , 106.290 , 106.263 bound ECD residues 300-331 .
Immunofluorescence microscopy showed that mAbs 106.318 and 106.156 stained the surface of fixed , intact CHO cells expressing wild type hFSH-R .
However , following cell permeabilization all four antibodies stained hFSH-R in Golgi and endoplasmic reticulum .
Permeabilized cells expressing truncated variants ECD213 and ECD254 showed staining accumulated in the endoplasmic reticulum\/nuclear envelope continuum .
ECD335\/His was found to accumulate in extended endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) .
The ER location of ECD335\/His was confirmed by double labeling experiments with concanavalin A and ECD mAb .
Glycosidase digestion followed by Western blot analysis show ECD213 and ECD335\/His to be glycosylated , but not ECD254 .
Both glycosylated truncated hFSH-R variants were sensitive to peptide-N-glycanase F and endoglycosidase H but insensitive to neuraminidase indicating that these variants possess high mannose type oligosaccharides .
Thus truncated hFSH-R variants do not reach the medial or trans Golgi where high mannose oligosaccharides are trimmed and sialic acid is added .
These data suggest that the conformation the ECD of the wild type receptor is different from the ECD alone expressed in the endoplasmic reticulum .
This information suggests that the ECD serves two distinct roles ; the first is to bind FSH and the other is likely to contact the endodomain of the receptor , which presumably leads to activation of the endodomain for signal transduction .
Genomic organization of the human gene (CA5) and pseudogene for mitochondrial carbonic anhydrase V and their localization to chromosomes 16q and 16p.
Carbonic anhydrase V ( CA V ) is expressed in mitochondrial matrix in liver and several other tissues .
It is of interest for its putative roles in providing bicarbonate to carbamoyl phosphate synthetase for ureagenesis and to pyruvate carboxylase for gluconeogenesis and its possible importance in explaining certain inherited metabolic disorders with hyperammonemia and hypoglycemia .
Following the recent characterization of the cDNA for human CA V , we report the isolation of the human gene from two lambda genomic libraries and its characterization .
The CA V gene ( CA5 ) is approximately 50 kb long and contains 7 exons and 6 introns .
The exon-intron boundaries are found in positions identical to those determined for the previously described CA II , CA III , and CA VII genes .
Like the CA VII gene , CA5 does not contain typical TATA and CAAT promoter elements in the 5 ' flanking region but does contain a TTTAA sequence 147 nucleotides upstream of the initiation codon .
CA5 also contains a 12-bp GT-rich segment beginning 13 bp downstream of the polyadenylation signal in the 3 ' untranslated region of exon 7 .
FISH analysis allowed CA5 to be assigned to chromosome 16q24 .3 .
An unprocessed pseudogene containing sequence homologous to exons 3-7 and introns 3-6 was also isolated and was assigned by FISH analysis to chromosome 16p11.2-p12 .
Induction of apoptosis by Apo-2 ligand, a new member of the tumor necrosis factor cytokine family.
Cytokines in the tumor necrosis factor ( TNF ) family regulate development and function of the immune system .
We have isolated a new member of this family , designated Apo-2 ligand ( Apo-2L ) , via an expressed sequence tag .
Apo-2L is a 281-amino acid protein , related most closely to Fas\/Apo -1 ligand .
Transfected Apo-2L is expressed at the cell surface with its C terminus exposed , indicating a type II transmembrane protein topology .
Like Fas\/Apo -1 ligand and TNF , the C-terminal extracellular region of Apo-2L ( amino acids 114-281 ) exhibits a homotrimeric subunit structure .
Soluble Apo-2L induces extensive apoptosis in lymphoid as well as non-lymphoid tumor cell lines .
The effect of Apo-2L is not inhibited by soluble Fas\/Apo -1 and TNF receptors ; moreover , expression of human Fas\/Apo -1 in mouse fibroblasts , which confers sensitivity to induction of apoptosis by agonistic anti-Fas\/Apo -1 antibody , does not confer sensitivity to Apo-2L .
Hence , Apo-2L acts via a receptor which is distinct from Fas\/Apo -1 and TNF receptors .
These results suggest that , along with other family members such as Fas\/Apo -1 ligand and TNF , Apo-2L may serve as an extracellular signal that triggers programmed cell death .
Yaf2 inhibits Myc biological function.
The proto-oncogenes of the myelocytomatosis viral oncogene homolog ( MYC ) family , including MYC , MYCN and MYCL , encode nuclear proteins that act as transcription factors .
The Myc protein is the best studied member of this family and is involved in cell cycle regulation , differentiation and cell death .
We have previously demonstrated that the zinc-finger protein Yaf2 interacts with the central region of MycN and enhances MycN dependent transcriptional activation .
Here we show that Yaf2 also binds to the Myc protein in vivo and in vitro .
In contrast to the activating effect on MycN function , Yaf2 inhibits Myc mediated transactivation and transformation .
This differential influence on two members of the Myc family gives insight into a new mechanism to modulate the biological activities of Myc transcription factors .
HLA-G expression in melanoma: a way for tumor cells to escape from immunosurveillance.
Considering the well established role of nonclassical HLA-G class I molecules in inhibiting natural killer ( NK ) cell function , the consequence of abnormal HLA-G expression in malignant cells should be the escape of tumors from immunosurveillance .
To examine this hypothesis , we analyzed HLA-G expression and NK sensitivity in human malignant melanoma cells .
Our analysis of three melanoma cell lines and ex vivo biopsy demonstrated that ( i ) IGR and M74 human melanoma cell lines exhibit a high level of HLA-G transcription with differential HLA-G isoform transcription and protein expression patterns , ( ii ) a higher level of HLA-G transcription ex vivo is detected in a skin melanoma metastasis biopsy compared with a healthy skin fragment from the same individual , and ( iii ) HLA-G protein isoforms other than membrane-bound HLA-G1 protect IGR from NK lysis .
It thus appears of critical importance to consider the specific role of HLA-G expression in tumors in the design of future cancer immunotherapies .
Characterization of SAF-A, a novel nuclear DNA binding protein from HeLa cells with high affinity for nuclear matrix/scaffold attachment DNA elements.
We identified four proteins in nuclear extracts from HeLa cells which specifically bind to a scaffold attachment region ( SAR ) element from the human genome .
Of these four proteins , SAF-A ( scaffold attachment factor A ) , shows the highest affinity for several homologous and heterologous SAR elements from vertebrate cells .
SAF-A is an abundant nuclear protein and a constituent of the nuclear matrix and scaffold .
The homogeneously purified protein is a novel double stranded DNA binding protein with an apparent molecular weight of 120 kDa .
SAF-A binds at multiple sites to the human SAR element ; competition studies with synthetic polynucleotides indicate that these sites most probably reside in the multitude of A\/T-stretches which are distributed throughout this element .
In addition we show by electron microscopy that the protein forms large aggregates and mediates the formation of looped DNA structures .
Identification of cDNAs encoding two human alpha class glutathione transferases (GSTA3 and GSTA4) and the heterologous expression of GSTA4-4.
The Expressed Sequence Tag database has been searched for examples of previously undescribed human Alpha class glutathione transferases .
An incomplete transcript of the previously described GSTA3 gene was identified in a cDNA library derived from 8-9 week placenta .
This indicates that the GSTA3 gene is functional and is possibly under specific developmental regulation .
A second cDNA , termed GSTA4 , was identified in a brain cDNA library .
The encoded GSTA4-4 enzyme was expressed in Escherichia coli and was found to be immunologically distinct from GSTA1-1 and to have high activity with alk-2-enals .
Although GSTA4-4 appears to be functionally similar to the mouse GST5 .7 and rat GST8-8 Alpha class enzymes , sequence comparisons and phylogenetic analysis suggest that GSTA4-4 may be a member of a distinct Alpha class subgroup .
CXC chemokine receptor 3 expression on CD34(+) hematopoietic progenitors from human cord blood induced by granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor: chemotaxis and adhesion induced by its ligands, interferon gamma-inducible protein 10 and monokine induced by interferon gamma.
CXC chemokine receptor 3 ( CXCR3 ) , which is known to be expressed predominately on memory and activated T lymphocytes , is a receptor for both interferon gamma ( IFN-gamma ) - inducible protein 10 ( gamma IP-10 ) and monokine induced by IFN-gamma ( Mig ) .
We report the novel finding that CXCR3 is also expressed on CD34 ( + ) hematopoietic progenitors from human cord blood stimulated with granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor ( GM-CSF ) but not on freshly isolated CD34 ( + ) progenitors .
Freshly isolated CD34 ( + ) progenitors expressed low levels of CXCR3 messenger RNA , but this expression was highly up-regulated by GM-CSF , as indicated by a real-time quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction technique .
gamma IP-10 and Mig induced chemotaxis of GM-CSF-stimulated CD34 ( + ) progenitors by means of CXCR3 , since an anti-CXCR3 monoclonal antibody ( mAb ) was found to block gamma IP-10-induced and Mig-induced CD34 ( + ) progenitor chemotaxis .
These chemotactic attracted CD34 ( + ) progenitors are colony-forming units-granulocyte-macrophage .
gamma IP-10 and Mig also induced GM-CSF-stimulated CD34 ( + ) progenitor adhesion and aggregation by means of CXCR3 , a finding confirmed by the observation that anti-CXCR3 mAb blocked these functions of gammaIP-10 and Mig but not of chemokine stromal cell-derived factor 1 alpha .
gamma IP-10-induced and Mig-induced up-regulation of integrins ( CD49a and CD49b ) was found to play a crucial role in adhesion of GM-CSF-stimulated CD34 ( + ) progenitors .
Moreover , gamma IP-10 and Mig stimulated CXCR3 redistribution and cellular polarization in GM-CSF-stimulated CD34 ( + ) progenitors .
These results indicate that CXCR3-gamma IP-10 and CXCR3-Mig receptor-ligand pairs , as well as the effects of GM-CSF on them , may be especially important in the cytokine\/chemokine environment for the physiologic and pathophysiologic events of differentiation of CD34 ( + ) hematopoietic progenitors into lymphoid and myeloid stem cells , subsequently immune and inflammatory cells .
These processes include transmigration , relocation , differentiation , and maturation of CD34 ( + ) hematopoietic progenitors .
( Blood .
2000 ; 96:1230 -1238 )
Cloning and characterization of a specific coactivator, ARA70, for the androgen receptor in human prostate cells.
The androgen receptor ( AR ) is a member of the steroid receptor superfamily that plays an important role in male sexual differentiation and prostate cell proliferation .
Mutations or abnormal expression of AR in prostate cancer can play a key role in the process that changes prostate cancer from androgen-dependent to an androgen-independent stage .
Using a yeast two-hybrid system , we were able to isolate a ligand-dependent AR-associated protein ( ARA70 ) , which functions as an activator to enhance AR transcriptional activity 10-fold in the presence of 10 ( -10 ) M dihydrotestosterone or 10 ( -9 ) M testosterone , but not 10 ( -6 ) M hydroxyflutamide in human prostate cancer DU145 cells .
Our data further indicated that ARA70 Will only slightly induce the transcriptional activity of other steroid receptors such as estrogen receptor , glucocorticoid receptor , and progesterone receptor in DU145 cells .
Together , these data suggest that AR may need a specific coactivator ( s ) such as ARA70 for optimal androgen activity .
A human ubiquitin conjugating enzyme, L-UBC, maps in the Alzheimer's disease locus on chromosome 14q24.3.
We have identified a novel ubiquitin conjugating enzyme gene , L-UBC , which maps to human Chromosome ( Chr ) 14q24 .3 .
This is also the location of the major early onset familial Alzheimer 's disease gene ( FAD3 ) .
L-UBC encodes a protein that demonstrates homology to the yeast ubiquitin conjugating enzyme , UBC-4 , and human UbcH5 .
Their functions are to ubiquitinate specific proteins targeted for degradation .
The protein also exhibits very strong homology to a rabbit protein , E2-F1 , which mediates p53 degradation driven by papilloma virus E6 protein in vitro .
The accumulation of specific proteins that have undergone aberrant processing in neurofibrillary tangles and amyloid plaques is the classic pathological feature in brains of Alzheimer 's disease patients .
Abnormal ubiquitination has previously been suggested to play a role in the etiology of Alzheimer 's disease .
This gene therefore represents a plausible candidate gene for FAD3 .
The receptor for ciliary neurotrophic factor.
Although neurotrophic factors were originally isolated on the basis of their ability to support the survival of neurons , these molecules are now thought to influence many aspects of the development and maintenance of the nervous system .
Identifying the receptors for these neurotrophic factors should aid in identifying the cells on which these factors act and in understanding their precise mechanisms of action .
A '' tagged-ligand panning '' procedure was used to clone a receptor for ciliary neurotrophic factor ( CNTF ) .
This receptor is expressed exclusively within the nervous system and skeletal muscle .
The CNTF receptor has a structure unrelated to the receptors utilized by the nerve growth factor family of neurotrophic molecules , but instead is most homologous to the receptor for a cytokine , interleukin-6 .
This similarity suggestes that the CNTF receptor , like the interleukin-6 receptor , requires a second , signal-transducing component .
In contrast to all known receptors , the CNTF receptor is anchored to cell membranes by a glycosyl-phosphatidylinositol linkage .
The ubiquitously expressed pICln protein forms homomeric complexes in vitro.
Endothelial cells contain a cell-volume sensitive chloride conductance with biophysical properties similar to those of a ubiquitously expressed chloride current that is activated by cell swelling .
The latter current has been associated with the ICln protein ( pICln ) which may be the chloride channel itself or , alternatively , a channel regulator .
We were therefore interested in whether pICln is involved in the endothelial volume-sensitive chloride current .
As a first step , we have cloned human pICln and studied its expression at the protein level .
Using a polyclonal antiserum raised against human pICln we found a widespread expression of pICln , both in endothelial cells and in other cell lines .
A characteristic feature of pICln is its anomalous migration during denaturing polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis .
We also demonstrate that bacterially expressed pICln forms homomeric complexes in vitro .
Triplet repeat-containing ribosomal protein L14 gene in immortalized human endothelial cell line (t-HUE4).
A cDNA encoding human 60S ribosomal subunit protein L14 ( hRL14 ) was isolated from a human immortal endothelial cell line , t-HUE4 .
This cell line was established via a series of cell lines cultured in a serum-free and a protein-free medium , and a directional cDNA library has been constructed and screened in search for the genes modulating protein synthesis machinery in cell proliferation .
A putative full-length clone with an open reading frame of 220 amino acids ; predicted molecular weight of 23.6 kDa .
A significant identity for hRL14 was observed with rat RL14 ( 85 % identity ) , with exception of COOH-terminal region , but not with any eukaryote amino acid sequences so far deposited to database .
The typical features of ribosomal proteins were observed in hRL14 , as seen in nuclear targeting sequences necessary for the transport from cytoplasm to nucleolus , a bZIP like ( basic region-leucine zipper ) element for the binding to rRNA , and the internal repeat sequences ; the pentapeptide QKA ( A\/S ) X. The COOH-terminal region of the transcripts contained fifteen triplet repeats ( GCT ; alanine ) at nucleotide 465 to 509 , which is significantly expanded compared to the rat RL14 .
However , the repeat number was all the same among the normal human endothelial cell line and the cell lines established in the course of t-HUE4 establishment .
A single band with about 800 bases was identified by Northern blot analysis without tissue specificity .
This GCT repeat was found to be one of the longest uninterrupted repeats in a coding sequence , which were associated with the highest degree of polymorphism .
Molecular cloning of the cDNA for human TrkC (NTRK3), chromosomal assignment, and evidence for a splice variant.
TrkC is a receptor tyrosine kinase that is activated by neurotrophin-3 , a factor important in the development of certain areas of the central nervous system .
We have cloned and sequenced the human trkC cDNA and found that the predicted amino acid sequence is 97 to 98 % homologous to the rat and porcine trkC sequences , respectively .
The rat trkC has several isoforms due to alternative splicing in the tyrosine kinase domain .
We cloned one human splice variant that has a nucleic acid sequence identical to the rat isoform with an insert of 14 amino acids .
The human trkC cDNA also has a ( CGG ) n repeat in the 5 ' - untranslated region .
This sequence was not highly polymorphic in that 79 of 80 chromosomes examined had eight repeats , while 1 chromosome had four repeats .
By PCR analysis of a somatic cell hybrid panel and fluorescence in situ hybridization with the cDNA clone , human trkC was mapped to chromosome 15q24-q25 .
Cell-cell adhesion mediated by binding of membrane-anchored ligand LERK-2 to the EPH-related receptor human embryonal kinase 2 promotes tyrosine kinase activity.
Human embryonal kinase 2 ( HEK2 ) is a protein-tyrosine kinase that is a member of the EPH family of receptors .
Transcripts for HEK2 have a wide tissue distribution .
Recently , a still growing family of ligands , which we have named LERKs , for ligands of the eph-related kinases , has been isolated .
In order to analyze functional effects between the LERKs and the HEK2 receptor , we expressed HEK2 cDNA in an interleukin-3-dependent progenitor cell line 32D that grows as single cells in culture .
Within the group of LERKs , LERK-2 and -5 were shown to bind to HEK2 .
Membrane-bound and soluble forms of LERK-2 were demonstrated to signal through HEK2 as judged by receptor phosphorylation .
Coincubation of HEK2 and LERK-2 expressing cells induced cell-cell adhesion and formation of cell aggregates .
This interaction could be inhibited by preincubation of HEK2 expressing cells with soluble LERK-2 .
Coexpression of HEK2 and LERK-2 in 32D cells showed reduced kinase activity and autophosphorylation of HEK2 compared with the juxtacrine stimulation , which seems to be due to a reduced sensitivity of the receptor .
Sequence and expression of a human type II mesothelial keratin.
Using mRNA from cultured human mesothelial cells , we constructed bacterial plasmids and lambda phage vectors that contained cDNA sequences specific for the keratins expressed in these cells .
A cloned cDNA encoding keratin K7 ( 55 kD ) was identified by positive hybrid selection .
Southern Blot analysis indicated that this sequence is represented only once in the human genome , and Northern Blot analysis demonstrated that the gene encoding K7 is expressed in abundance in cultured bronchial and mesothelial cells , but only weakly in cultured epidermal cells and not at all in liver , colon , or exocervical tissue .
The predicted amino acid sequence of this keratin has revealed a striking difference between this keratin and the type II keratins expressed in epidermal cells : whereas all of the epidermal type II keratins thus far sequenced have long nonhelical termini rich in glycine and serine , this mesothelial type II keratin has amino and carboxy terminal regions that are unusually short and lack the inexact repeats of glycine and serine residues .
Involvement of DNA polymerase delta in DNA repair synthesis in human fibroblasts at late times after ultraviolet irradiation.
DNA repair synthesis following UV irradiation of confluent human fibroblasts has a biphasic time course with an early phase of rapid nucleotide incorporation and a late phase of much slower nucleotide incorporation .
The biphasic nature of this curve suggests that two distinct DNA repair systems may be operative .
Previous studies have specifically implicated DNA polymerase delta as the enzyme involved in DNA repair synthesis occurring immediately after UV damage .
In this paper , we describe studies of DNA polymerase involvement in DNA repair synthesis in confluent human fibroblasts at late times after UV irradiation .
Late UV-induced DNA repair synthesis in both intact and permeable cells was found to be inhibited by aphidicolin , indicating the involvement of one of the aphidicolin-sensitive DNA polymerases , alpha or delta .
In permeable cells , the process was further analyzed by using the nucleotide analog ( butylphenyl ) -2 ' - deoxyguanosine 5 ' - triphosphate , which inhibits DNA polymerase alpha several hundred times more strongly than it inhibits DNA polymerase delta .
The ( butylphenyl ) -2 ' - deoxyguanosine 5 ' - triphosphate inhibition curve for late UV-induced repair synthesis was very similar to that for polymerase delta .
It appears that repair synthesis at late times after UV irradiation , like repair synthesis at early times , is mediated by DNA polymerase delta .
A third member of the synapsin gene family.
Synapsins are a family of neuron-specific synaptic vesicle-associated phosphoproteins that have been implicated in synaptogenesis and in the modulation of neurotransmitter release .
In mammals , distinct genes for synapsins I and II have been identified , each of which gives rise to two alternatively spliced isoforms .
We have now cloned and characterized a third member of the synapsin gene family , synapsin III , from human DNA .
Synapsin III gives rise to at least one protein isoform , designated synapsin IIIa , in several mammalian species .
Synapsin IIIa is associated with synaptic vesicles , and its expression appears to be neuron-specific .
The primary structure of synapsin IIIa conforms to the domain model previously described for the synapsin family , with domains A , C , and E exhibiting the highest degree of conservation .
Synapsin IIIa contains a novel domain , termed domain J , located between domains C and E. The similarities among synapsins I , II , and III in domain organization , neuron-specific expression , and subcellular localization suggest a possible role for synapsin III in the regulation of neurotransmitter release and synaptogenesis .
The human synapsin III gene is located on chromosome 22q12-13 , which has been identified as a possible schizophrenia susceptibility locus .
On the basis of this localization and the well established neurobiological roles of the synapsins , synapsin III represents a candidate gene for schizophrenia .
Cloning of Nrf1, an NF-E2-related transcription factor, by genetic selection in yeast.
We have devised a complementation assay in yeast to clone mammalian transcriptional activators and have used it to identify a human basic leucine-zipper transcription factor that we have designated Nrf1 for NF-E2-related factor 1 .
Nrf1 potentially encodes a 742-aa protein and displays marked homology to the mouse and human NF-E2 transcription factors .
Nrf1 activates transcription via NF-E2 binding sites in yeast cells .
The ubiquitous expression pattern of Nrf1 and the range of promoters containing the NF-E2 binding motif suggest that this gene may play a role in the regulation of heme synthesis and ferritin genes .
A common polymorphic allele of the human luteinizing hormone beta-subunit gene: additional mutations and differential function of the promoter sequence.
A common genetic variant ( V ) of the human luteinizing hormone ( LH ) beta-subunit gene was recently discovered .
The V-LH molecules have higher bioactivity in vitro , but shorter half-life in circulation , which apparently is related to the alterations of LH function observed in individuals homo - and heterozygous for the V-LHbeta allele .
We have now studied whether additional mutations in the V-LHbeta promoter sequence could contribute to the altered physiology of the LH variant molecules .
The 661 bp 5 ' - flanking region of the V-LHbeta gene , retrieved from human genomic DNA by PCR , contained eight single-nucleotide changes , as compared with the wild-type ( wt ) LHbeta promoter .
The finding was consistent in DNA samples of different ethnic groups .
Reporter constructs with various lengths of the wt - and V-LH promoter sequences , driving the firefly luciferase reporter gene , were transfected into an immortalized mouse pituitary cell line , LbetaT ( 2 ) , known to express the endogenous LHbeta gene , and into a non-endocrine human embryonic kidney cell line , HEK 293 .
Basal expression levels of the V-LHbeta promoter constructs were on average 36 % higher in LbetaT ( 2 ) cells ( P ( 0.001 ; n = 29 ) , and 40 % higher in HEK 293 cells ( P ( 0.001 ; n = 16 ) , as compared with the respective wt sequences .
Numerous qualitative and quantitative differences were found between the two cell lines in responses of the two promoter sequences to stimulation with 12 - O - tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate , forskolin , 8-bromo-cAMP , progesterone and gonado - tropin-releasing hormone .
In conclusion , the V-LHbeta promoter has higher basal activity , and differs in response to hormonal stimulation , as compared with the wt-LHbeta promoter .
The altered promoter function of the V-LHbeta gene provides evidence for differences in regulation of the wt - and V-LHbeta genes , which may contribute to the differences observed in pituitary-gonadal function between carriers of the two LHbeta alleles .
The findings also suggest a novel evolutionary mechanism whereby polymorphic changes resulting in altered bioactivity of a gene product may be compensated for by additional mutations in the cognate promoter sequence , changing transcription of the same gene .
Mutually exclusive expression of a helix-loop-helix gene and N-myc in human neuroblastomas and in normal development.
We have isolated a novel human gene encoding a helix-loop-helix ( HLH ) protein by molecularly cloning chromosome 1p36-specific CpG islands .
The gene termed heir-1 was localized to the neuroblastoma consensus deletion at 1p36.2-p36 .12 .
Its predicted protein is 95.8 % identical to the mouse HLH462 protein and has clear homology to the mouse Id and Drosophila emc proteins .
Heir-1 does not encode a basic DNA binding domain as found in basic HLH proteins .
The gene is expressed specifically at high abundance in adult lung , kidney and adrenal medulla , but not in adult brain .
Despite prominent heir-1 expression in adrenal medulla , which is a prime target for neuroblastomas , 10 out of 12 neuroblastoma-derived cell lines revealed very low levels of heir-1 mRNA .
Low heir-1 expression was generally found in tumor cell lines with N-myc overexpression , whereas the two cell lines displaying high heir-1 levels did not overexpress N-myc .
Mutually exclusive expression of both genes was also found by in situ hybridization in developing mouse tissues , particularly in the forebrain neuroectoderm .
We conclude that heir-1 expression is reduced specifically in the majority of neuroblastomas and suggest an inverse correlation between heir-1 and N-myc expression in neuroblastoma tumors and in embryonic development .
cDNA cloning, expression and chromosome mapping of the human STAT4 gene: both STAT4 and STAT1 genes are mapped to 2q32.2-->q32.3.
Studies of transcriptional activation by interferons and a variety of cytokines have led to the identification of a family of proteins that serve as signal transducers and activators of transcription ( STAT ) .
STAT4 is phosphorylated following interleukin ( IL ) -12 stimulation and is essential for IL-12 signal transduction .
The human STAT4 cDNA was cloned , and both STAT4 and STAT1 genes were mapped to human chromosome bands 2q32 .2 -- ) q32 .3 by fluorescence in situ hybridization .
These results suggest that STAT4 and STAT1 may have arisen via a tandem gene duplication .
However , human STAT1 is expressed ubiquitously , whereas human STAT4 is expressed in several tissues including spleen , heart , brain , peripheral blood cells , and testis .
A novel gene, Translin, encodes a recombination hotspot binding protein associated with chromosomal translocations.
We have identified a novel gene , Translin , encoding a protein which specifically binds to consensus sequences at breakpoint junctions of chromosomal translocations in many cases of lymphoid malignancies .
The encoded protein , Translin , is a previously undescribed type with no significant similarity to known proteins .
In the native form , Translin polypeptides form a multimeric structure which is responsible for its DNA binding activity .
Nuclear localization of Translin is limited to lymphoid cell lines , raising the intriguing possibility that nuclear transport of Translin is regulated in a physiologically significant way such that active nuclear transport is associated with the lymphoid specific process known as Ig\/TCR gene rearrangement .
X-linked spastic paraplegia (SPG1), MASA syndrome and X-linked hydrocephalus result from mutations in the L1 gene.
X-linked hydrocephalus , spastic paraplegia type I and MASA syndrome are related disorders with loci in subchromosomal region Xq28 .
We have previously shown that X-linked hydrocephalus is caused by mutations in the gene for neural cell adhesion molecule L1 ( L1CAM ) , an axonal glycoprotein involved in neuronal migration and differentiation .
Here we report mutations of the L1 gene in MASA syndrome and SPG1 , in addition to HSAS families .
Two of the HSAS mutations would abolish cell surface expression of L1 and represent the first functional null mutations in this disorder .
Our results indicate that these three syndromes from part of a clinical spectrum resulting from a heterogeneous group of mutations in the L1 gene .
Langerin, a novel C-type lectin specific to Langerhans cells, is an endocytic receptor that induces the formation of Birbeck granules.
We have identified a type II Ca2 + - dependent lectin displaying mannose-binding specificity , exclusively expressed by Langerhans cells ( LC ) , and named Langerin .
LC are uniquely characterized by Birbeck granules ( BG ) , which are organelles consisting of superimposed and zippered membranes .
Here , we have shown that Langerin is constitutively associated with BG and that antibody to Langerin is internalized into these structures .
Remarkably , transfection of Langerin cDNA into fibroblasts created a compact network of membrane structures with typical features of BG .
Langerin is thus a potent inducer of membrane superimposition and zippering leading to BG formation .
Our data suggest that induction of BG is a consequence of the antigen-capture function of Langerin , allowing routing into these organelles and providing access to a nonclassical antigen-processing pathway .
Sequence analysis of two genomic regions containing the KIT and the FMS receptor tyrosine kinase genes.
The KIT and FMS tyrosine kinase receptors , which are implicated in the control of cell growth and differentiation , stem through duplications from a common ancestor .
We have conducted a detailed structural analysis of the two loci containing the KIT and FMS genes .
The sequence of the approximately 90-kb KIT locus reveals the position and size of the 21 introns and of the 5 ' regulatory region of the KIT gene .
The introns and the 3 ' - untranslated parts of KIT and FMS have been analyzed in parallel .
Comparison of the two sequences shows that , while introns of both genes have extensively diverged in size and sequence , this divergence is , at least in part , due to intron expansion through internal duplications , as suggested by the discrete extant analogies .
Repetitive elements as well as exon predictions obtained using the GRAIL and GENEFINDER programs are described in detail .
These programs led us to identify a novel gene , designated SMF , immediately downstream of FMS , in the opposite orientation .
This finding emphasizes the gene-rich characteristic of this genomic region .
The human glycine receptor beta subunit: primary structure, functional characterisation and chromosomal localisation of the human and murine genes.
The inhibitory glycine receptor ( GlyR ) is a pentameric receptor comprised of alpha and beta subunits , of which the beta subunit has not been characterised in humans .
A 2106 bp cDNA , isolated from a human hippocampal cDNA library , contained an open reading frame of 497 amino acids which encodes the beta subunit of the human GlyR .
The mature human GlyR beta polypeptide displays 99 % amino acid identity with the rat GlyR beta subunit and 48 % identity with the human GlyR alpha 1 subunit .
Neither ( 3H ) strychnine binding nor glycine-gated currents were detected when the human GlyR beta subunit cDNA was expressed in the human embryonic kidney 293 cell line .
However , co-expression of the beta subunit cDNA with the alpha 1 subunit cDNA resulted in expression of functional GlyRs which showed a 4-fold reduction in the EC50 values when compared to alpha 1 homomeric GlyRs .
Glycine-gated currents of alpha 1\/beta GlyRs were 17-fold less sensitive than homomeric alpha 1 GlyRs to the antagonists picrotoxin , picrotoxinin and picrotin , providing clear evidence that heteromeric alpha 1\/beta GlyRs were expressed .
The beta subunit appears to play a structural rather than ligand binding role in GlyR function .
Fluorescence in situ hybridisation was used to localize the gene encoding the human GlyR beta subunit ( GLRB ) to chromosome 4q32 , a position syntenic with mouse chromosome 3 .
In situ hybridisation using the human GlyR beta subunit cDNA showed that the murine GlyR beta subunit gene ( Glrb ) maps to the spastic ( spa ) locus on mouse chromosome 3 at bands E3-F1 .
This is consistent with the recent finding that a mutation in the murine GlyR beta subunit causes the spa phenotype .
It also raises the possibility that mutations in the human beta subunit gene may cause inherited disorders of the startle response .
Repression of IL-2 promoter activity by the novel basic leucine zipper p21SNFT protein.
IL-2 is the major autocrine and paracrine growth factor produced by T cells upon T cell stimulation .
The inducible expression of IL-2 is highly regulated by multiple transcription factors , particularly AP-1 , which coordinately activate the promoter .
Described here is the ability of the novel basic leucine zipper protein p21SNFT to repress AP-1 activity and IL-2 transcription .
A detailed analysis of the repression by p21SNFT repression on the IL-2 promoter distal NF-AT\/AP -1 site demonstrates that it can bind DNA with NF-AT and Jun , strongly suggesting that it represses NF-AT\/AP -1 activity by competing with Fos proteins for Jun dimerization .
The importance of this repression is that p21SNFT inhibits the trans-activation potential of protein complexes that contain Jun , thereby demonstrating an additional level of control for the highly regulated , ubiquitous AP-1 transcription factor and the IL-2 gene .
A novel K+ channel beta-subunit (hKv beta 1.3) is produced via alternative mRNA splicing.
Voltage-gated K + channels can form multimeric complexes with accessory beta-subunits .
We report here a novel K + channel beta-subunit cloned from human heart , hKv beta 1.3 , that has 74-83 % overall identity with previously cloned beta-subunits .
Comparison of hKv beta 1.3 with the previously cloned hKv beta 3 and rKv beta 1 proteins indicates that the carboxyl-terminal 328 amino acids are identical , while unique variable length amino termini exist .
Analysis of human beta-subunit cDNA and genomic nucleotide sequences confirm that these three beta-subunits are alternatively spliced from a common beta-subunit gene .
Co-expression of hKv beta 1.3 in Xenopus oocytes with the delayed rectifier hKv1 .5 indicated that hKv beta 1.3 has unique functional effects .
This novel beta-subunit induced a time-dependent inactivation during membrane voltage steps to positive potentials , induced a 13-mV hyperpolarizing shift in the activation curve , and slowed deactivation ( tau = 13 + \/ - 0.5 ms versus 35 + \/ - 1.7 ms at -40 mV ) .
Most notably , hKv beta 1.3 converted the Kv1 .5 outwardly rectifying current voltage relationship to one showing strong inward rectification .
These data suggest that Kv channel current diversity may arise from association with alternatively spliced Kv beta-subunits .
A simplified nomenclature for the K + channel beta-subunit subfamilies is suggested .
Isolation and characterization of cDNA encoding a human nuclear antigen predominantly recognized by autoantibodies from patients with primary biliary cirrhosis.
Autoantibodies to a novel nuclear Ag , Sp100 , have recently been described that recognize a nuclear protein with an apparent molecular mass of 95 to 100 kDa and a dot-like distribution within cell nuclei .
By immunoscreening of a lambda gt11 cDNA expression library derived from HeLa cells with an anti-Sp100 autoimmune serum a 0.7-kb cDNA ( Sp26 ) coding for a fragment of Sp100 was isolated .
Expression of this cDNA and use of the recombinant protein in ELISA revealed that the fragment carries major Sp100 autoepitopes and that anti-Sp100 autoantibodies predominantly occur in patients suffering from primary biliary cirrhosis ( 50\/184 ) .
The Sp26 cDNA was used as hybridization probe for isolation of longer cDNA from human liver - and placenta-derived lambda gt10 cDNA libraries .
Overlapping fragments were assembled to generate a full length cDNA coding for a protein with a molecular mass of 53 kDa and an isoelectric point of 4.7 .
The Sp100 autoantigen expressed in vitro from this cDNA and authenticated by a capture immunoblot assay , comigrated in SDS-PAGE with the authentic HeLa autoantigen of 95 to 100 kDa and thus showed an aberrant electrophoretic mobility .
Computer based protein sequence analysis of the Sp100 autoantigen revealed regions of striking sequence similarities to the alpha 1 and alpha 2 domains of various human and non-human MHC class I Ag and to several transacting transcriptional regulatory proteins .
Cloning and characterization of Rep-8 (D8S2298E) in the human chromosome 8p11.2-p12.
A novel human gene referred to as the Rep-8 gene ( D8S2298E ) was cloned by a combination of exon trapping , thermal asymmetric interlaced-PCR , and screening of a cDNA library .
It is located in human chromosome 8p11.2-p12 .
The gene consists of eight exons and spans about 20 kb between the glutathione S-reductase and the protein phosphatase 2A beta subunit genes .
The full-length Rep-8 gene contains 1483 nucleotides and codes for a protein of 270 amino acids .
Southern blot experiments showed that the Rep-8 gene exists as a single copy per haploid .
With a zoo blot analysis , human Rep-8 DNA hybridized strongly with the monkey DNA , but only weakly with the DNAs of species other than Homo sapiens .
Northern blot analysis showed that it is expressed abundantly in the testis and ovary , suggesting that the Rep-8 gene product may play a role in reproduction .
A new cytokine (IK) down-regulating HLA class II: monoclonal antibodies, cloning and chromosome localization.
The role of HLA class II Antigens in the control of the immune response is determined not only by the genetic polymorphism of these molecules , but also by their density on the cell surface .
It is therefore essential to identify the signals that modulate HLA Class II gene activity in normal and neoplastic cells .
We have purified a cytokine ( IK factor , 19 kDa ) secreted by the leukemic cell line K562 and several cancer cells , which inhibits HLA Class II antigen induction by IFN-gamma .
We produced specific mAbs which antagonize the biological effect of IK in colon carcinoma Colo 205 cells induced to express HLA-DR molecules by IFN-gamma .
Moreover , in Colo 205 , HLA-DR can also be induced by the protein synthesis inhibitor Cycloheximide ( 0.1 micrograms ml-1 ) ; and addition of IK factor almost completely abolishes HLA class II expression .
We have also performed the cloning and the sequencing of a specific cDNA .
This probe recognizes a 2.1 Kb mRNA in different cell types .
The nucleotide sequence exhibits no homologies with known cytokines .
IK gene localization shows that it maps on chromosome 2p15-p14 .
The transient transfection of the cDNA in COS cells induces the secretion of a biologically active 19 kDa protein which is recognized in Western blot by 1C5B11 blocking mAb .
This paper reports the characterization of a new cytokine down-regulating HLA class II Antigens , whose analysis will help to better understand HLA class II gene regulation and the mechanism of escape from immunorecognition in cancer cells .
BCAR1, a human homologue of the adapter protein p130Cas, and antiestrogen resistance in breast cancer cells.
BACKGROUND : Treatment of breast cancer with the antiestrogen tamoxifen is effective in approximately one half of the patients with estrogen receptor-positive disease , but tumors recur frequently because of the development of metastases that are resistant to tamoxifen .
We have previously shown that mutagenesis of human estrogen-dependent ZR-75-1 breast cancer cells by insertion of a defective retrovirus genome caused the cells to become antiestrogen resistant .
In this study , we isolated and characterized the crucial gene at the breast cancer antiestrogen resistance 1 ( BCAR1 ) locus .
METHODS\/RESULTS : Transfer of the BCAR1 locus from retrovirus-mutated , antiestrogen-resistant cells to estrogen-dependent ZR-75-1 cells by cell fusion conferred an antiestrogen-resistant phenotype on the recipient cells .
The complete coding sequence of BCAR1 was isolated by use of exon-trapping and complementary DNA ( cDNA ) library screening .
Sequence analysis of human BCAR1 cDNA predicted a protein of 870 amino acids that was strongly homologous to rat p130Cas-adapter protein .
Genomic analysis revealed that BCAR1 consists of seven exons and is located at chromosome 16q23 .1 .
BCAR1 transcripts were detected in multiple human tissues and were similar in size to transcripts produced by retrovirus-mutated ZR-75-1 cells .
Transfection of BCAR1 cDNA into ZR-75-1 cells again resulted in sustained cell proliferation in the presence of antiestrogens , confirming that BCAR1 was the responsible gene in the locus .
CONCLUSIONS : Overexpression of the BCAR1 gene confers antiestrogen resistance on human ZR-75-1 breast cancer cells .
Overexpression of BCAR1 in retrovirus-mutated cells appears to result from activation of the gene 's promoter .
The isolation and characterization of this gene open new avenues to elucidating mechanisms by which the growth of human breast cancer becomes independent of estrogen .
The adipocyte specific transcription factor C/EBPalpha modulates human ob gene expression.
The ob gene product , leptin , apparently exclusively expressed in adipose tissue , is a signaling factor regulating body weight homeostasis and energy balance .
ob gene expression is increased in obese rodents and regulated by feeding , insulin , and glucocorticoids , which supports the concept that ob gene expression is under hormonal control , which is expected for a key factor controlling body weight homeostasis and energy balance .
In humans , ob mRNA expression is increased in gross obesity ; however , the effects of the above factors on human ob expression are unknown .
We describe the structure of the human ob gene and initial functional analysis of its promoter .
The human ob gene 's three exons cover approximately 15 kb of genomic DNA .
The entire coding region is contained in exons 2 and 3 , which are separated by a 2-kb intron .
The first small 30-bp untranslated exon is located ) 10.5 kb upstream of the initiator ATG codon .
Three kilobases of DNA upstream of the transcription start site has been cloned and characterized .
Only 217 bp of 5 ' sequence are required for basal adipose tissue-specific expression of the ob gene as well as enhanced expression by C\/EBPalpha .
Mutation of the single C\/EBPalpha site in this region abolished inducibility of the promoter by C\/EBPalpha in cotransfection assays .
The gene structure will facilitate our analysis of ob mutations in human obesity , whereas knowledge of sequence elements and factors regulating ob gene expression should be of major importance in the prevention and treatment of obesity .
Identification of a principal mRNA species for human 3alpha-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase isoform (AKR1C3) that exhibits high prostaglandin D2 11-ketoreductase activity.
Human 3alpha-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase exists in four isoforms , which belong to the aldo-keto reductase ( AKR ) superfamily and are named AKR1C1-AKR1C4 .
The properties of AKR1C3 have not been fully characterized compared to the other isoforms .
In addition , a cDNA that shows more than 99 % homology with AKR1C3 cDNA has been cloned from human myeloblasts .
We have here expressed and purified a recombinant enzyme ( designated as DBDH ) from this cDNA .
DBDH oxidized xenobiotic alicyclic alcohols and 3alpha - or 17beta-hydroxy-5beta-androstanes , and catalyzed the reversible conversion between prostaglandin D2 and 9alpha,11beta-prostaglandin F2 more efficiently than that of 3alpha - or 17beta-hydroxysteroids : the respective Km values were 0.6 and 6.8 microM , and kcat\/Km values were about 1,000 min-1 .
mM-1 .
Anti-inflammatory drugs highly inhibited the enzyme .
The recombinant AKR1C3 prepared by site-directed mutagenesis of DBDH also showed the same properties as the wild-type DBDH .
Analyses of expression of mRNAs for DBDH and AKR1C3 by reverse transcription-PCR indicated that only one mRNA species for DBDH is expressed in 33 human specimens of liver , kidney , lung , brain , heart , spleen , adrenal gland , small intestine , placenta , prostate , and testis .
These results suggest that AKR1C3 acts as prostaglandin D2 11-ketoreductase , and that its principal gene in the human has a coding region represented by DBDH cDNA .
Soluble forms of tumor necrosis factor receptors (TNF-Rs). The cDNA for the type I TNF-R, cloned using amino acid sequence data of its soluble form, encodes both the cell surface and a soluble form of the receptor.
Two proteins which specifically bind tumor necrosis factor ( TNF ) have recently been isolated from human urine in our laboratory .
The two proteins cross-react immunologically with two species of cell surface TNF receptors ( TNF-R ) .
Antibodies against one of the two TNF binding proteins ( TBPI ) were found to have effects characteristic of TNF , including stimulating phosphorylation of specific cellular proteins .
Oligonucleotide probes designed on the basis of the NH2-terminal amino acid sequence of TBPI were used to clone the cDNA for the structurally related cell surface type 1 TNF-R .
It is notable that although this receptor can signal the phosphorylation of cellular proteins , it appears from its amino acid sequence to be devoid of intrinsic protein kinase activity .
The extracellular domain of the receptor is composed of four internal cysteine-rich repeats , homologous to structures repeated four times in the extracellular domains of the nerve growth factor receptor and the B lymphocytes surface antigen CDw40 .
The amino acid composition and size of the extracellular domain of the type I TNF-R closely resemble those of TBPI .
The COOH-terminal amino acid sequence of the four cysteine rich repeats within the extracellular domain of the type I TNF-R matches the COOH-terminal sequence of TBPI .
Amino acid sequences in the extracellular domain also fully match other sequences found in TBPI .
On the other hand , amino acid sequences in the soluble form of the type II TNF-R ( TBPII ) , while indicating a marked homology of structure , did not suggest any identity between this protein and the extracellular domain of the type I TNF-R .
CHO cells transfected with type I TNF-R cDNA produced both cell surface and soluble forms of the receptor .
The receptor produced by CHO cells was recognized by several monoclonal antibodies against TBPI , reacting with several distinct epitopes in this molecule .
These data suggest that the soluble forms of the TNF-Rs are structurally identical to the extracellular cytokine binding domains of these receptors and are consistent with the notion that the soluble forms are , at least partly , derived from the same transcripts that encode the cell surface receptors .
An L-type calcium-channel gene mutated in incomplete X-linked congenital stationary night blindness.
The locus for the incomplete form of X-linked congenital stationary night blindness ( CSNB2 ) maps to a 1.1-Mb region in Xp11 .23 between markers DXS722 and DXS255 .
We identified a retina-specific calcium channel alpha1-subunit gene ( CACNA1F ) in this region , consisting of 48 exons encoding 1966 amino acids and showing high homology to L-type calcium channel alpha1-subunits .
Mutation analysis in 13 families with CSNB2 revealed nine different mutations in 10 families , including three nonsense and one frameshift mutation .
These data indicate that aberrations in a voltage-gated calcium channel , presumably causing a decrease in neurotransmitter release from photoreceptor presynaptic terminals , are a frequent cause of CSNB2 .
3-Methyladenine-DNA glycosylase (MPG protein) interacts with human RAD23 proteins.
Human 3-methyladenine-DNA glycosylase ( MPG protein ) initiates base excision repair by severing the glycosylic bond of numerous damaged bases .
In comparison , homologs of the Rad23 proteins ( hHR23 ) and the hXPC protein are involved in the recognition of damaged bases in global genome repair , a subset of nucleotide excision repair .
In this report , we show that the hHR23A and - B also interact with the MPG protein and can serve as accessory proteins for DNA damage recognition in base excision repair .
Furthermore , the MPG .
hHR23 protein complex elevates the rate of MPG protein-catalyzed excision from hypoxanthine-containing substrates .
This increased excision rate is correlated with a greater binding affinity of the MPG protein-hHR23 protein complex for damaged DNA .
These data suggest that the hHR23 proteins function as universal DNA damage recognition accessory proteins in both of these major excision repair pathways .
Isolation of hMRE11B: failure to complement yeast mre11 defects due to species-specific protein interactions.
The Saccharomyces cerevisiae MRE11 gene plays an important role in meiotic recombination , mitotic DNA repair and telomere maintenance .
We present the isolation of hMRE11B cDNA from a human HeLa cell cDNA library as an MRE11 homolog .
Compared to the previously identified hMRE11 , hMRE11B contains an additional 84bp sequence that results in a 28 amino-acid insertion close to the C-terminus .
The expression pattern of hMRE11B in different tissues shows the presence of two mRNA species of approx .
2.6 and 7.5 kb .
Overexpression of hMRE11B does not complement the alkylation sensitivity of the mre11 null and temperature-sensitive mutant strains .
In this study , we examine factors that may explain this lack of complementation .
First , both Northern and Western analyses rule out the lack of hMRE11B transcription and\/or translation in yeast .
Second , we demonstrate that hMre11B , like the yeast Mre11 protein , dimerizes in vivo in a yeast two-hybrid system .
This dimerization requires the C-terminal one-third of hMre11B protein , which includes the 28 amino acids absent in hMre11 .
However , hMre11B does not interact with Mre11 , Rad50 and Xrs2 .
Hence , the lack of protein-protein interaction between hMre11B and the yeast Mre11 , Rad50 , and Xrs2 may explain the inability of hMRE11B to complement the yeast mre11 mutants .
We rule out the hypothesis that the lack of interaction and , in turn of complementation , is due to the absence of sequence homology at the C-terminal domain of hMre11B compared to the yeast Mre11 .
Instead , we propose that the C-terminus of hMre11B participates in protein-protein interaction and functions in a species-specific manner .
Hyperproinsulinaemia in obese fat/fat mice associated with a carboxypeptidase E mutation which reduces enzyme activity.
Mice homozygous for the fat mutation develop obesity and hyperglycemia that can be suppressed by treatment with exogenous insulin .
The fat mutation maps to mouse chromosome 8 , very close to the gene for carboxypeptidase E ( Cpe ) , which encodes an enzyme ( CPE ) that processes prohormone intermediates such as proinsulin .
We now demonstrate a defect in proinsulin processing associated with the virtual absence of CPE activity in extracts of fat\/fat pancreatic islets and pituitaries .
A single Ser202Pro mutation distinguishes the mutant Cpe allele , and abolishes enzymatic activity in vitro .
Thus , the fat mutation represents the first demonstration of an obesity-diabetes syndrome elicited by a genetic defect in a prohormone processing pathway .
Functional domains of the SYT and SYT-SSX synovial sarcoma translocation proteins and co-localization with the SNF protein BRM in the nucleus.
The t ( X ; 18 ) ( p11 .2 ; q11 .2 ) chromosomal translocation commonly found in synovial sarcomas fuses the SYT gene on chromosome 18 to either of two similar genes , SSX1 or SSX2 , on the X chromosome .
The SYT protein appears to act as a transcriptional co-activator and the SSX proteins as co-repressors .
Here we have investigated the functional domains of the proteins .
The SYT protein has a novel conserved 54 amino acid domain at the N-terminus of the protein ( the SNH domain ) which is found in proteins from a wide variety of species , and a C-terminal domain , rich in glutamine , proline , glycine and tyrosine ( the QPGY domain ) , which contains the transcriptional activator sequences .
Deletion of the SNH domain results in a more active transcriptional activator , suggesting that this domain acts as an inhibitor of the activation domain .
The C-terminal SSX domain present in SYT-SSX translocation protein contributes a transcriptional repressor domain to the protein .
Thus , the fusion protein has transcriptional activating and repressing domains .
We demonstrate that the human homolog of the SNF2\/Brahama protein BRM co-localizes with SYT and SYT-SSX in nuclear speckles , and also interacts with SYT and SYT-SSX proteins in vitro .
This interaction may provide an explanation of how the SYT protein activates gene transcription .
Human mRNA polyadenylate binding protein: evolutionary conservation of a nucleic acid binding motif.
We have isolated a full length cDNA ( cDNA ) coding for the human poly ( A ) binding protein .
The cDNA derived 73 kd basic translation product has the same Mr , isoelectric point and peptidic map as the poly ( A ) binding protein .
DNA sequence analysis reveals a 70,244 dalton protein .
The N terminal part , highly homologous to the yeast poly ( A ) binding protein , is sufficient for poly ( A ) binding activity .
This domain consists of a four-fold repeated unit of approximately 80 amino acids present in other nucleic acid binding proteins .
In the C terminal part there is , as in the yeast protein , a sequence of approximately 150 amino acids , rich in proline , alanine and glutamine which together account for 48 % of the residues .
A 2,9 kb mRNA corresponding to this cDNA has been detected in several vertebrate cell types and in Drosophila melanogaster at every developmental stage including oogenesis .
Molecular cloning of the human homolog of a striatum-enriched phosphatase (STEP) gene and chromosomal mapping of the human and murine loci.
A gene for a protein tyrosine phosphatase ( PTPase ) was isolated from a human fetal brain cDNA library by PCR amplification .
Sequence analysis revealed that the PTPase has a single phosphatase catalytic domain located at the C-terminus that includes the highly conserved amino acid domain ( I\/V ) HCXAGXXR ( S\/T ) GX ( F\/Y ) found in all tyrosine phosphatases .
Two proline-rich regions located at the N-terminus may contain putative Src homology domain 3 ( SH3 ) binding motifs .
Comparison of the PTPase with a previously cloned striatum enriched phosphatase ( STEP ) from rat and from mouse exhibited a high degree of identity ( approximately 85-90 % ) at both the nucleotide and the amino acid levels , indicating that the human PTPase is the homolog of the rat and murine STEP gene .
By using a combination of somatic cell hybrid analysis and fluorescence in situ hybridization , we have mapped the human STEP locus to chromosome 11p15.2-p15 .1 and the murine STEP gene to chromosome 7B3-B5 .
These are two regions of known conserved synteny , providing further evidence that the human STEP is a true homolog of the murine STEP gene .
Candidate disease genes in the vicinity include Usher syndrome type 1C in human and a mouse mutant locus , twister ( twt ) .
Characterization of multiple mRNAs that encode mammalian translation initiation factor 5 (eIF-5).
Eukaryotic translation initiation factor 5 ( eIF-5 ) interacts with the 40 S initiation complex ( 40S.mRNA.MettRNAf.eIF-2 .
GTP ) to promote the hydrolysis of bound GTP with the concomitant joining of the 60 S ribosomal subunit to the 40 S initiation complex to form a functional 80 S initiation complex .
In this paper , the multiple mRNAs that encode mammalian eIF-5 have been characterized .
In rat tissues , three major eIF-5 mRNAs of 3.5 , 2.8 , and 2.2 kilobases in length are detected .
All major eIF-5 mRNAs are initiated from a single transcription initiation site , contain identical 5 ' - untranslated and coding regions , but differ from one another only in the length of their 3 ' - untranslated regions .
The different lengths of the 3 ' - untranslated region of eIF-5 mRNAs are generated by the use of alternative polyadenylation signals .
Additionally , we demonstrate tissue-specific variations in eIF-5 mRNA expression as well as preference for polyadenylation sites .
These results should lead to increased understanding of the regulation of eIF-5 gene expression .
Recessive mutations in the gene encoding the beta-subunit of rod phosphodiesterase in patients with retinitis pigmentosa.
We have found four mutations in the human gene encoding the beta-subunit of rod cGMP phosphodiesterase ( PDE beta ) that cosegregate with autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa , a degenerative disease of photoreceptors .
In one family two affected siblings both carry allelic nonsense mutations at codons 298 and 531 .
Affected individuals have abnormal rod and cone electroretinograms .
PDE beta is the second member of the phototransduction cascade besides rhodopsin that is absent or altered as a cause of retinitis pigmentosa , suggesting that other members of this pathway may be defective in other forms of this disease .
Collagen XVIII, containing an endogenous inhibitor of angiogenesis and tumor growth, plays a critical role in the maintenance of retinal structure and in neural tube closure (Knobloch syndrome).
Knobloch syndrome ( KS ) is an autosomal recessive disorder defined by the occurrence of high myopia , vitreoretinal degeneration with retinal detachment , macular abnormalities and occipital encephalocele .
The KS causative gene had been assigned to a 4.3 cM interval at 21q22 .3 by linkage analysis of a large consanguineous Brazilian family .
We reconstructed the haplotypes of this family with ten additional markers ( five were novel ) and narrowed the candidate interval to a region of ( 245 kb , which contains 24 expressed sequence tags , the KIAA0958 gene and the 5 ' end of the COL18A1 gene .
We identified a homozygous mutation at the AG consensus acceptor splice site of COL18A1 intron 1 exclusively among the 12 KS patients , which was not found among 140 control chromosomes .
This mutation predicts the creation of a stop codon in exon 4 and therefore the truncation of the alpha1 ( XVIII ) collagen short form , which was expressed in human adult retina .
These findings provide evidence that KS is caused by mutations in COL18A1 which , therefore , has a major role in determining the retinal structure as well as in the closure of the neural tube .
Therefore , we show for the first time that the absence of a collagen isoform impairs embryonic cell proliferation and\/or migration as a primary or secondary effect .
Human pulmonary alveolar proteinosis associated with a defect in GM-CSF/IL-3/IL-5 receptor common beta chain expression.
Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis ( PAP ) is a heterogeneous disorder of genetic or acquired etiologies .
In some cases congenital PAP is associated with hereditary surfactant protein ( SP ) - B deficiency .
To date , the molecular defect in the majority of patients with PAP has not been identified .
In mice , PAP has been generated by targeted deletion of the genes for either the GM-CSF\/IL -3 \/ IL-5 receptor common beta chain ( beta c ) or GM-CSF .
Here , we describe an expression defect of beta c in three of seven pediatric patients with PAP and in one patient with severe lung disease suspected to be PAP .
The patients failed to express normal levels of beta c as shown by flow cytometry .
Strikingly reduced or absent function of beta c was demonstrated by ligand binding studies and progenitor clonogenic assays .
Analysis of beta c DNA revealed a point mutation from proline to threonine at codon 602 in one patient .
Our findings provide evidence that a defect in the expression of a hematopoietic cytokine receptor is associated with human PAP .
Overexpression and functional characterization of kinin receptors reveal subtype-specific phosphorylation.
G protein-coupled receptors such as the receptors for bradykinin are present in low copy numbers in most natural cells .
To overcome the problems associated with the analysis of these receptors at the protein level , we used highly efficient expression systems such as the baculovirus\/insect cell system .
However , the structural and functional statuses of recombinant receptors have often remained elusive .
We have expressed the two types of human kinin receptors , B1 and B2 , in Sf9 cells .
Both receptors are found on the surface of infected cells where they display the same pharmacological profiles as their cognate receptors of native cells .
The functional analysis of kinin receptors coupled to the intracellular signaling pathways of Sf9 cells revealed differential patterns of ligand-induced phosphorylation for the two kinin receptors .
The B1 receptor failed to undergo ligand-induced phosphorylation .
However the B2 receptor showed selective phosphorylation of a minor 38 kDa band and lack of phosphorylation of a dominant 33 kDa band , indicating that only a fraction of the receptor protein is functionally linked to the kinase pathway .
A striking discrepancy between the number of binding sites and the amount of receptor protein per cell ( molar ratio of 1:20 to 1:1000 ) indicated that a significant portion of kinin receptors is associated with the intracellular compartments of Sf9 cells .
Pulse-chase and immunoprecipitation experiments demonstrated that the heterogeneity of recombinant receptors is not due to proteolytic processing but likely reflects incomplete or lacking N-glycosylation .
We conclude that the baculovirus\/Sf9 system is suitable for the recombinant expression and functional analysis of kinin receptors though limitations of the system have to be considered .
Molecular cloning and functional analysis of a human cDNA encoding an Escherichia coli AlkB homolog, a protein involved in DNA alkylation damage repair.
The Escherichia coli AlkB protein is involved in protecting cells against mutation and cell death induced specifically by SN2-type alkylating agents such as methyl methanesulfonate ( MMS ) .
A human cDNA encoding a polypeptide homologous to E. coli AlkB was discovered by searching a database of expressed sequence tags ( ESTs ) derived from high throughput cDNA sequencing .
The full-length human AlkB homolog ( hABH ) cDNA clone contains a 924 bp open reading frame encoding a 34 kDa protein which is 52 % similar and 23 % identical to E. coli AlkB .
The hABH gene , which maps to chromosome 14q24 , was ubiquitously expressed in 16 human tissues examined .
When hABH was expressed in E. coli alkB mutant cells partial rescue of the cells from MMS-induced cell death occurred .
Under the conditions used expression of hABH in skin fibroblasts was not regulated by treatment with MMS .
Our findings show that the AlkB protein is structurally and functionally conserved from bacteria to human , but its regulation may have diverged during evolution .
Homology between a region of the human retinoblastoma gene and L1 family repetitive sequences.
Five clones that hybridized weakly with the human retinoblastoma ( Rb ) gene were obtained by screening a human genomic library in a non-stringent condition .
The DNAs of two of these clones were partially sequenced and found to contain a region with considerable homology to part of the Rb gene .
These two clones were found to contain L1 family repeating sequences .
This finding is discussed in relation with possible functions of the L1 family .
As the L1 family is transposable , the Rb gene may be inactivated by recombination at this homologous region .
Another possibility related with the DNA binding properties of Rb and L1 family proteins is also discussed .
Mdm2 is a RING finger-dependent ubiquitin protein ligase for itself and p53.
Mdm2 has been shown to regulate p53 stability by targeting the p53 protein for proteasomal degradation .
We now report that Mdm2 is a ubiquitin protein ligase ( E3 ) for p53 and that its activity is dependent on its RING finger .
Furthermore , we show that Mdm2 mediates its own ubiquitination in a RING finger-dependent manner , which requires no eukaryotic proteins other than ubiquitin-activating enzyme ( E1 ) and an ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme ( E2 ) .
It is apparent , therefore , that Mdm2 manifests an intrinsic capacity to mediate ubiquitination .
Mutation of putative zinc coordination residues abrogated this activity , as did chelation of divalent cations .
After cation chelation , the full activity could be restored by addition of zinc .
We further demonstrate that the degradation of p53 and Mdm2 in cells requires additional potential zinc-coordinating residues beyond those required for the intrinsic activity of Mdm2 in vitro .
Replacement of the Mdm2 RING with that of another protein ( Praja1 ) reconstituted ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation of Mdm2 .
However , this RING was ineffective in ubiquitination and proteasomal targeting of p53 , suggesting that there may be specificity at the level of the RING in the recognition of heterologous substrates .
Protein structure of fetal antigen 1 (FA1). A novel circulating human epidermal-growth-factor-like protein expressed in neuroendocrine tumors and its relation to the gene products of dlk and pG2.
The present paper describes the primary structure , glycosylation and tissue localization of fetal antigen 1 ( FA1 ) isolated from second-trimester human amniotic fluid .
FA1 is a single-chained , heterogeneous glycoprotein of 225-262 amino acid residues .
FA1 has six well conserved epidermal-growth-factor motifs and contains up to ten O-glycosylation and N-glycosylation sites , six of which are differentially glycosylated .
Alignment to the translated sequences of Mus .
musculus dlk and human dlk revealed 86 % and 99 % identity , respectively , to a 259-amino-acid residue overlap , and this high similarity extends with minor corrections to the human adrenal-specific mRNA , pG2 as well .
Immunohistochemical analysis demonstrated the presence of FA1 in 10 out of 14 lung tumors containing neuroendocrine elements , and in the placental villi where FA1 was exclusively seen in stromal cells in close contact to the vascular structure .
In the pancreas , FA1 co-localized with insulin in the insulin secretory granules of the beta cells within the islets of Langerhans .
Our findings suggest that FA1 is synthesized as a membrane anchored protein and released into the circulation after enzymic cleavage , and that circulating FA1 represents the post-translationally modified gene product of human dlk which , in turn , is identical to human adrenal-specific mRNA pG2 .
Structure, mapping and expression of the human gene encoding the homeodomain protein, SIX2.
Vertebrate genes with sequence similarity to the Drosophila homeobox gene , sine oculis ( so ) , constitute the SIX family .
There is notable expression of members of this family in anterior neural structures , and several SIX genes have been shown to play roles in vertebrate and insect development , or have been implicated in maintenance of the differentiated state of tissues .
Mutations in three of these genes in man ( SIX5 , SIX6 and SIX3 ) are associated with severe phenotypes , and therefore , the cloning of other human genes from this family is of interest .
We have cloned and characterised the gene that encodes human SIX2 , elucidated its gene structure and conducted expression studies in a range of tissues .
SIX2 is widely expressed in the late first-trimester fetus , but has a limited range of expression sites in the adult .
The expression pattern of SIX2 and its localisation to chromosome 2p15-p16 will be of use in assessing its candidacy in human developmental disorders .
Expression, purification, and functional analysis of the human serine protease HtrA2.
HumHtrA2 or Omi is a recently described member of a novel family of mammalian serine proteases homologous to the Escherichia coli htrA gene product .
Although the physiological function of members of this new family is unclear , the current understanding is that as well as being involved with the degradation aberrantly folded proteins during conditions of cellular stress , they may possess a chaperone-like role under normal conditions .
In this report we describe the overexpression of humHtrA2 in two heterologous systems comparing the merits of each .
We found that molecular analysis of processing events in Sf9 cells allowed us to revisit E. coli expression systems which were initially unsuccessful .
Using E. coli we were able to produce milligram amounts of ) 90 % pure recombinant enzyme as determined by SDS-PAGE gels .
By means of fluorescently labeled substrates alpha - and beta-casein and zymography , the proteolytic activity of recombinant HumHtrA2 was also demonstrated .
Actinin-4, a novel actin-bundling protein associated with cell motility and cancer invasion.
Regulation of the actin cytoskeleton may play a crucial role in cell motility and cancer invasion .
We have produced a monoclonal antibody ( NCC - Lu-632 , IgM , k ) reactive with an antigenic protein that is upregulated upon enhanced cell movement .
The cDNA for the antigen molecule was found to encode a novel isoform of nonmuscle alpha-actinin .
This isoform ( designated actinin-4 ) was concentrated in the cytoplasm where cells were sharply extended and in cells migrating and located at the edge of cell clusters , but was absent from focal adhesion plaques or adherens junctions , where the classic isoform ( actinin-1 ) was concentrated .
Actinin-4 shifted steadily from the cytoplasm to the nucleus upon inhibition of phosphatidylinositol 3 kinase or actin depolymerization .
The cytoplasmic localization of actinin-4 was closely associated with an infiltrative histological phenotype and correlated significantly with a poorer prognosis in 61 cases of breast cancer .
These findings suggest that cytoplasmic actinin-4 regulates the actin cytoskeleton and increases cellular motility and that its inactivation by transfer to the nucleus abolishes the metastatic potential of human cancers .
A novel candidate oncogene, MCT-1, is involved in cell cycle progression.
Using the arbitrarily primed-PCR ( AP-PCR ) assay to detect genetic abnormalities that occur in a panel of lymphoid cell lines , we identified an amplified stretch of genomic DNA that contained a putative open reading frame .
Northern blot analysis with this genomic clone revealed widespread low level expression in normal human tissue .
The full cDNA sequence was obtained with no significant homology to any known genes in the genome database .
We termed this novel gene with multiple copies in a T-cell malignancy as MCT-1 .
MCT-1 was localized to the long arm of chromosome Xq22-24 by flourescence in situ hybridization analysis .
Although there was no significant homology at the primary sequence level , there was a limited degree of amino acid homology with a domain of cyclin H that appears to specify protein-protein complexes .
This relationship between MCT-1 and cyclin H implied a potential role for MCT-1 in cell cycle regulation .
Overexpression of MCT-1 increased the proliferative rate of cells by decreasing the length of the G1 phase without a reciprocal increase in the S and G2-M phases .
Recent work has established the role of cell cycle regulatory molecules in the development of certain human malignancies .
Therefore , we investigated the transforming ability of MCT-1 overexpression using soft agar growth assays and demonstrated that only MCT-1-overexpressing cells were able to establish colonies .
Taken together , MCT-1 is a novel candidate oncogene with homology to a protein-protein binding domain of cyclin H.
Purification and characterization of the recombinant human calcium-binding S100 proteins CAPL and CACY.
The S100 proteins CAPL and CACY are expressed in a tissue - and cell-specific manner and have been reported to be associated with the metastatic phenotype of tumor cells .
In order to study the biochemical , cation-binding , and conformational properties , we produced and purified large amounts of the recombinant human proteins in Escherichia coli .
Several characteristics of native proteins are shown to correspond to those of the bacterially expressed proteins .
Both are able to form homodimers in vitro , probably the biologically active species , but not heterodimers .
The Ca ( 2 + ) - binding parameters were studied by flow offlysis at physiological ionic strength .
Both isotherms show a maximum of two Ca2 + per protein and are insensitive to Mg2 + , indicating that the sites are of the Ca ( 2 + ) - specific type .
The isotherms show slight ( CAPL , nH = 1.15 ) or pronounced ( CACY , nH = 1.33 ) positive cooperativity with K0 .5 values of 0.32 mM ( CACY ) and 0.15 mM ( CAPL ) , indicating that the sites are of the low-affinity type .
Conformational changes in the Tyr microenvironment of CACY indicate that Ca2 + binding induces a shift of Tyr to a less polar environment .
Mg2 + does not affect the fluorescence properties nor does it induce a difference spectrum , thus suggesting that at physiological ionic conditions it does not interact with the protein .
The Ca ( 2 + ) - induced difference spectra of CAPL are about 3 times smaller than those of CACY , suggesting that the additional Tyr84 in CACY is much more sensitive to Ca2 + than the two Tyr residues conserved in both proteins .
Association between atopy and variants of the beta subunit of the high-affinity immunoglobulin E receptor.
The beta-subunit of the high-affinity IgE receptor ( Fc epsilon RI-beta ) on chromosome 11 is maternally linked to atopy , the state of enhanced IgE responsiveness underlying allergic asthma and rhinitis .
We have identified a common variant of Fc epsilon RI-beta , lle181Leu within the 4th transmembrane domain .
Leu181 shows significant association with positive IgE responses in a random patient sample .
Amongst 60 unrelated nuclear families with allergic asthmatic probands , Leu181 is identified in 10 ( 17 % ) , is maternally inherited in each , and shows a strong association with atopy .
Our data indicate that Fc epsilon RI-beta , subject to maternal modification , may be the atopy-causing locus on chromosome 11q .
HCC-1, a novel chemokine from human plasma.
A novel CC chemokine , HCC-1 , was isolated from the hemofiltrate of patients with chronic renal failure .
HCC-1 has a relative molecular mass of 8,673 and consists of 74 amino acids including four cysteines linked to disulfide bonds .
HCC-1 cDNA was cloned from human bone marrow and shown to code for the mature protein plus a putative 19-residue leader sequence .
Mature HCC-1 has sequence identity of 46 % with macrophage inflammatory protein ( MIP ) -1 alpha and MIP-1 beta , and 29-37 % with the other human CC chemokines .
Unlike MIP-1 alpha and the other CC chemokines , HCC-1 is expressed constitutively in several normal tissues ( spleen , liver , skeletal and heart muscle , gut , and bone marrow ) , and is present at high concentrations ( 1-80 nM ) in plasma .
HCC-1 has weak activities on human monocytes and acts via receptors that also recognize MIP-1 alpha .
It induced intracellular Ca2 + changes and enzyme release , but no chemotaxis , at concentrations of 100-1 ,000 nM , and was inactive on T lymphocytes , neutrophils , and eosinophil leukocytes .
In addition , HCC-1 enhanced the proliferation of CD34 + myeloid progenitor cells .
It was as effective as MIP-1 alpha , but about 100-fold less potent .
The C5a chemoattractant receptor mediates mucosal defence to infection.
A family of G-protein-coupled chemoattractant receptors is known to mediate the transport and activation of neutrophils and macrophages This family includes receptors for chemokines , such as interleukin-8 , bacterial formylated peptides , platelet-activating factor , leukotriene B4 , and the complement anaphylatoxins .
The apparent redundancy of these receptors suggests that they have an important underlying role in host defense .
To isolate the contribution of particular molecules , we disrupted a gene that encodes a single chemoattractant receptor .
Here we show that mice deficient in the chemoattractant C5a receptor , in comparison to their wild-type littermates , were unable to clear intrapulmonary-instilled Pseudomonas aeruginosa , despite a marked increase in neutrophil influx , and succumbed to pneumonia .
These C5a-receptor-deficient mice challenged with sublethal inocula of Pseudomonas become superinfected with secondary bacterial strains .
We conclude that the C5a receptor has a non-redundant function , and is required for mucosal host defense in the lung .
cDNA cloning and mitochondrial import of the beta-subunit of the human electron-transfer flavoprotein.
We have isolated a cDNA clone which encodes the entire beta-subunit of human electron-transferring flavoprotein ( ETF ) by screening an expression library from human liver using polyclonal antibodies against porcine ETF .
This cDNA encodes a protein of 255 amino-acid residues with a predicted molecular mass of 27,877 Da which shows a high degree of similarity with partial amino-acid sequences obtained from both rat liver and Paracoccus denitrificans beta-ETF .
Northern-blot analysis shows that the human beta-ETF mRNA is approximately 1 kb in size and is abundant in liver , heart and skeletal muscle .
Incubation with intact mitochondria indicates that the cDNA-encoded beta-ETF polypeptide contains the information necessary to reach the mitochondrial matrix .
These data are in agreement with previous experiments suggesting that beta-ETF , unlike the majority of nuclear-encoded mitochondrial matrix proteins , does not have a cleavable leader peptide .
Furthermore , when valinomycin is added to the incubation mixture , the import is abolished , thus demonstrating that it is an energy-dependent process .
Interestingly , the sequence analysis of beta-ETF protein identifies a 26.3 % identity with the Fix A gene product of the nitrogen-fixing bacterium Azorhizobium caulinodans .
Cloning of the cDNA for the human ATP synthase OSCP subunit (ATP5O) by exon trapping and mapping to chromosome 21q22.1-q22.2.
Exon trapping was used to clone portions of potential genes from human chromosome 21 .
One trapped sequence showed striking homology with the bovine and rat ATP synthase OSCP ( oligomycin sensitivity conferring protein ) subunit .
We subsequently cloned the full-length human ATP synthase OSCP cDNA ( GDB\/HGMW approved name ATP50 ) from infant brain and muscle libraries and determined its nucleotide and deduced amino acid sequence ( EMBL\/GenBank Accession No. .
X83218 ) .
The encoded polypeptide contains 213 amino acids , with more than 80 % identity to bovine and murine ATPase OSCP subunits and over 35 % identity to Saccharomyces cerevisiae and sweet potato sequences .
The human ATP5O gene is located at 21q22.1-q22 .2 , just proximal to D21S17 , in YACs 860G11 and 838C7 of the Chumakov et al .
( Nature 359:380 , 1992 ) YAC contig .
The gene is expressed in all human tissues examined , most strongly in muscle and heart .
This ATP5O subunit is a key structural component of the stalk of the mitochondrial respiratory chain F1F0-ATP synthase and as such may contribute in a gene dosage-dependent manner to the phenotype of Down syndrome ( trisomy 21 ) .
Coding sequence and chromosome mapping of the human gene (CDC46) for replication protein hCdc46/Mcm5.
We have isolated the complete cDNA sequence encoding the human homolog of the yeast replication protein Cdc46\/Mcm5 .
The cDNA was used as a probe for chromosomal fluorescence in situ hybridization ( FISH ) , which localized the human Cdc46 gene ( CDC46 ) to chromosome region 22q13 .1 -- ) q13 .2 .
This is the fourth human Mcm gene whose chromosome region has been determined , and it is now apparent that human Mcm genes are widely distributed in the genome .
As deduced from the cDNA sequence , human protein hCdc46 is composed of 734 amino acids and contains a central region that is almost 80 % identical with the yeast protein .
Immunoprecipitation experiments with hCdc46-specific antibodies confirm that essentially all nuclear hCdc46 proteins form a stable dimeric complex with protein P1Mcm3 .
Isolation of a novel human cDNA (rhoHP1) homologous to rho genes.
A novel full-length cDNA showing homology with rho genes was isolated from a human placenta cDNA library .
Sequencing of a total of 1086 nucleotides of this clone revealed an open reading frame of 630 nucleotides ( 210 amino acids ) .
In view of its degree of homology to members of the Rho family of molecules ( 50-54 % identical amino acids , 60-63 % identical nucleotides within the coding region ) , the predicted product was designated RhoHP1 ( Rho-related protein HP1 ) .
Northern analysis indicated that a message about 1.2-kb long is expressed in human heart , placenta , liver , skeletal muscle , and pancreas and , with weaker intensity , in several other tissues .
Coexpression of two distinct genes is required to generate secreted bioactive cytotoxic lymphocyte maturation factor.
Cytotoxic lymphocyte maturation factor ( CLMF ) is a disulfide-bonded heterodimeric lymphokine that ( i ) acts as a growth factor for activated T cells independent of interleukin 2 and ( ii ) synergizes with suboptimal concentrations of interleukin 2 to induce lymphokine-activated killer cells .
We now report the cloning and expression of both human CLMF subunit cDNAs from a lymphoblastoid B-cell line , NC-37 .
The two subunits represent two distinct and unrelated gene products whose mRNAs are coordinately induced upon activation of NC-37 cells .
Coexpression of the two subunit cDNAs in COS cells is necessary for the secretion of biologically active CLMF ; COS cells transfected with either subunit cDNA alone do not secrete bioactive CLMF .
Recombinant CLMF expressed in mammalian cells displays biologic activities essentially identical to natural CLMF , and its activities can be neutralized by monoclonal antibodies prepared against natural CLMF .
Since this heterodimeric protein displays the properties of an interleukin , we propose that CLMF be given the designation interleukin 12 .
Cloning, sequencing and expression of a cDNA encoding mammalian valyl-tRNA synthetase.
A fragment of the cDNA encoding a rat valyl-tRNA synthetase ( TrsVal ) - like protein was cloned from a rat cDNA library in lambda gt11 using an oligodeoxyribonucleotide ( oligo ) probe .
Three independent plaque clones containing the human TrsVal cDNA were then isolated from a lambda gt10 human erythroleukemia cDNA library using the rat cDNA fragment as the hybridization probe .
Sequence analyses of the cDNA fragments provided a 3.2-kb sequence with an open reading frame that contained the ` HIGH ' synthetase signature sequence and the tRNA 3 ' - end-binding motif , KMSKS , and putative Val-binding motif , EWCISRQ .
The sequence was extended to the 3 ' end of the cDNA by the polymerase chain reaction using an internal primer and an oligo ( dT ) adapter .
The deduced 1051-amino-acid sequence shares 65 % identity with yeast TrsVal , and contains a highly basic N-terminal region , a newly evolved protease-sensitive region in sequence close to the C terminus , and several sites for protein kinase C phosphorylation .
A 3-kb cDNA fragment was sub-cloned into plasmid pSVL and expressed in COS-7 cells ; up to a sevenfold increase in TrsVal activity was obtained .
These results confirm the cloning and sequencing of a human TrsVal-encoding cDNA .
Human serum biotinidase. cDNA cloning, sequence, and characterization.
Biotinidase ( EC 3.5.1.12 ) catalyzes the hydrolysis of biocytin , the product of biotin-dependent carboxylase degradation , to biotin and lysine .
Biotinidase deficiency is an inherited metabolic disorder of biotin recycling that is characterized by neurological and cutaneous abnormalities , and can be successfully treated with biotin supplementation .
Sequences of tryptic peptides of the purified human serum enzyme were used to design oligonucleotide primers for polymerase chain reaction amplification from human hepatic total RNA to generate putative biotinidase cDNA fragments .
Sequence analysis of a cDNA isolated from a human liver library by plaque hybridization with the largest cDNA probe revealed an open reading frame of 1629 bases encoding a protein of 543 amino acid residues , including 41 amino acids of a potential signal peptide .
Comparison of the open reading frame with the known biotinidase tryptic peptides and recognition of the expressed protein encoded by this cDNA by monoclonal antibodies prepared against purified biotinidase demonstrated the identity of this cDNA .
Southern analyses suggested that biotinidase is a single copy gene and revealed that human cDNA probes hybridized to genomic DNA from mammals , but not from chicken or yeast .
Northern analysis indicated the presence of biotinidase mRNA in human heart , brain , placenta , liver , lung , skeletal muscle , kidney , and pancreas .
Human dipeptidyl-peptidase I. Gene characterization, localization, and expression.
Dipeptidyl-peptidase I , a lysosomal cysteine proteinase , is important in intracellular degradation of proteins and appears to be a central coordinator for activation of many serine proteinases in immune\/inflammatory cells .
Little is known about the molecular genetics of the enzyme .
In the present investigation the gene for dipeptidyl-peptidase I was cloned and characterized .
The gene spans approximately 3.5 kilobases and consists of two exons and one intron .
The genomic organization is distinct from the complex structures of the other members of the papain-type cysteine proteinase family .
By fluorescence in situ hybridization , the gene was mapped to chromosomal region 11q14.1-q14 .3 .
Analysis of the sequenced 5 ' - flanking region revealed no classical TATA or CCAAT box in the GC-rich region upstream of cap site .
A number of possible regulatory elements that could account for tissue-specific expression were identified .
Northern analyses demonstrated that the dipeptidyl-peptidase I message is expressed at high levels in lung , kidney , and placenta , at moderate to low levels in many organs , and at barely detectable levels in the brain , suggesting tissue-specific regulation .
Among immune\/inflammatory cells , the message is expressed at high levels in polymorphonuclear leukocytes and alveolar macrophages and their precursor cells .
Treatment of lymphocytes with interleukin-2 resulted in a significant increase in dipeptidyl-peptidase I mRNA levels , suggesting that this gene is subjected to transcriptional regulation .
The results provide initial insights into the molecular basis for the regulation of human dipeptidyl-peptidase I.
MDC9, a widely expressed cellular disintegrin containing cytoplasmic SH3 ligand domains.
Cellular disintegrins are a family of proteins that are related to snake venom integrin ligands and metalloproteases .
We have cloned and sequenced the mouse and human homolog of a widely expressed cellular disintegrin , which we have termed MDC9 ( for metalloprotease\/disintegrin\/cysteine-rich protein 9 ) .
The deduced mouse and human protein sequences are 82 % identical .
MDC9 contains several distinct protein domains : a signal sequence is followed by a prodomain and a domain with sequence similarity to snake venom metalloproteases , a disintegrin domain , a cysteine-rich region , an EGF repeat , a membrane anchor , and a cytoplasmic tail .
The cytoplasmic tail of MDC9 has two proline-rich sequences which can bind the SH3 domain of Src , and may therefore function as SH3 ligand domains .
Western blot analysis shows that MDC9 is an approximately 84-kD glycoprotein in all mouse tissues examined , and in NIH 3T3 fibroblast and C2C12 myoblast mouse cell lines .
MDC9 can be both cell surface biotinylated and 125I-labeled in NIH 3T3 mouse fibroblasts , indicating that the protein is present on the plasma membrane .
Expression of MDC9 in COS-7 cells yields an 84-kD protein , and immunofluorescence analysis of COS-7 cells expressing MDC9 shows a staining pattern that is consistent with a plasma membrane localization .
The apparent molecular mass of 84 kD suggests that MDC9 contains a membrane-anchored metalloprotease and disintegrin domain .
We propose that MDC9 might function as a membrane-anchored integrin ligand or metalloprotease , or that MDC9 may combine both activities in one protein .
Structure, expression, and genetic linkage of the mouse BCM1 (OX45 or Blast-1) antigen. Evidence for genetic duplication giving rise to the BCM1 region on mouse chromosome 1 and the CD2/LFA3 region on mouse chromosome 3.
The mouse BCM1 ( OX45 , Blast-1 ) antigen has been cDNA cloned and sequenced to provide data supporting the view that BCM1 , LFA3 , and CD2 constitute a subgroup within the Ig superfamily .
Mouse BCM1 is widely expressed on leukocytes and is likely to be anchored to the cell surface by a glycosyl-phosphatidylinositol anchor , as is the case for rat and human BCM1 antigen .
Genetic linkage studies by recombination and pulse field analysis showed the BCM1 locus ( Bcm-1 ) to be on distal mouse chromosome 1 and to be linked within 1,600 kb to the locus for an ATPase alpha chain gene ( Atpa-3 ) .
A similar relationship was established between the human BCM1 locus ( BCM1 ) and ATP1A2 , and other markers on chromosome 1q .
Conservation of genomic organization within a segment of human chromosome 1q and mouse chromosome 1 was demonstrated .
A similar situation is seen in the region of the CD2 and LFA3 genes between mouse chromosome 3 and human chromosome 1p .
Furthermore , the CD2\/LFA3 genes are linked within 580 kb to Atpa-1 \/ ATP1A1 genes to provide a parallel situation to the linkage between Bcm-1 \/ BCM1 and Atpa-3 \/ ATP1A2 on chromosomes 1 ( mouse ) and 1q ( human ) .
Taken together , the data suggest duplication of a chromosome region including the precursors of the genes for BCM1 , CD2 , and LFA3 , and the ATPase genes to give rise to the linkage groups now observed .
The duplicated regions may have stayed together on chromosome 1 in the human ( with the insertion of a centromere ) , while in the mouse , the genetic regions are proposed to have become dispersed in the formation of chromosomes 1 and 3 .
CD2 and LFA3 are more dissimilar in sequence than BCM1 and LFA3 , and if the precursors of the CD2 and LFA3 loci formed before the proposed chromosome segment duplication , then a gene encoding a recognizer molecule for BCM1 may exist in linkage with Bcm-1 \/ BCM1 on chromosome 1 ( mouse ) and 1q ( human ) .
Cloning, sequencing and expression of a novel cDNA encoding human vacuolar ATPase (14-kDa subunit).
A cDNA encoding the 14-kDa subunit of vacuolar ATPase was cloned from human fetal brain .
The sequence was composed of 680 nucleotides containing an open reading frame of 357 nucleotides .
The deduced peptide sequence consisted of 119 amino acid residues with a calculated molecular weight of 13,369 Da and a pI of 5.19 .
Overall , this amino-acid sequence was respectively 69 % and 70 % identical to those of Manduca sexta and Drosophila melanogaster 14-kDa subunits , although the two representatives of Class Insecta were remarkably similar to one another ( 91 % identity ) .
Three regions in particular ( the N-terminal , amino acids 5-36 ; the middle , residues 58-68 ; and the C-terminal , residues 88-118 ) were highly conserved .
Hence , we think that the 14-kDa subunits have evolved from the same ancestral gene , and that the three conserved regions are important for the structure and function of vacuolar ATPase .
A single 0.8-kb band was detected in various human tissues by Northern blot analysis .
Since the human 14-kDa subunit is expressed ubiquitously , it might be a housekeeping protein .
A separate transcript found in the cDNA library lacked a 6-bp segment in the 5 ' non-coding region ( nucleotides -40 to -35 ) and also carried a 23C to T ( 8Thr to Ile ) point mutation in the coding region ; these minor differences likely reflected normal polymorphism .
Molecular cloning of human D-dopachrome tautomerase cDNA: N-terminal proline is essential for enzyme activation.
D-Dopachrome tautomerase converts 2-carboxy-2 ,3 - dihydroindole-5 ,6 - quinone ( D-dopachrome ) into 5,6-dihydroxyindole .
This protein has an amino acid sequence that is highly homologous with that of macrophage migration inhibitory factor ( MIF ) , which has the potential to catalyze D-dopachrome to 5,6-dihydroxyindole-2-carboxylic acid and is an important cytokine for T-lymphocyte activation .
We isolated and sequenced a 566 bp-long cDNA encoding human D-dopachrome tautomerase .
The cDNA contains an open reading frame encoding 118 amino acids , including the initiator methionine .
The amino acid sequence of the protein shares 80 % homology with that of the rat enzyme .
Northern blot analysis demonstrated that mRNA of D-dopachrome tautomerase is expressed in a large amount in the liver , and to lesser extent in other organs , including the heart , lung and pancreas .
After purification of D-dopachrome tautomerase expressed in E. coli , we confirmed that the recombinant protein catalyzes the conversion of D-dopachrome to 5,6-dihydroxyindole .
Its catalytic mechanism is not well understood .
We found that the protein completely lost the enzyme activity when the N-terminal proline residue was replaced with alanine by site-directed mutagenesis .
This fact suggests that the N-terminal proline is essential for the catalytic mechanism .
Although the precise pathophysiological function of D-dopachrome tautomerase remains to be elucidated , the present results could contribute to further understanding of isomerase activity in relation to the immune response .
Localization of the intronless gene coding for calmodulin-like protein CLP to human chromosome 10p13-ter.
The functional intronless gene coding for a calmodulin-like protein ( CLP ) has been localized to human chromosome 10p13-ter .
Chromosomal assignment was performed by Southern blot analysis of DNA from human-rodent somatic cell hybrids and amplification of a CLP gene-specific 1090-bp DNA fragment by the polymerase chain reaction ( PCR ) on DNA from human-hamster cell hybrids .
Chromosomal sublocalization was carried out by in situ hybridization of human chromosome metaphase spreads .
The CLP gene is the first member of the human calmodulin\/calmodulin-like gene family to be chromosomally sublocalized .
Its presence near the telomeric end of the short arm of chromosome 10 may be of significance with respect to its highly ( epithelial ) cell-type restricted expression in vivo and strong downregulation upon malignant transformation .
The generation of a human CLP gene-specific sequence tag site specified by the two primers used for PCR should prove useful for future linkage studies .
Coassembly of TRP and TRPL produces a distinct store-operated conductance.
The Drosophila retinal-specific protein , TRP ( transient receptor potential ) , is the founding member of a family of store-operated channels ( SOCs ) conserved from C. elegans to humans .
In vitro studies indicate that TRP is a SOC , but that the related retinal protein , TRPL , is constitutively active .
In the current work , we report that coexpression of TRP and TRPL leads to a store-operated , outwardly rectifying current distinct from that owing to either TRP or TRPL alone .
TRP and TRPL interact directly , indicating that the TRP-TRPL-dependent current is mediated by heteromultimeric association between the two subunits .
We propose that the light-activated current in photoreceptor cells is produced by a combination of TRP homo - and TRP-TRPL heteromultimers .
Structure and functional expression of the human macrophage inflammatory protein 1 alpha/RANTES receptor.
The chemokine beta family is comprised of at least six distinct cytokines that regulate trafficking of phagocytes and lymphocytes in mammalian species ; at least one of these , macrophage inflammatory protein 1 alpha ( MIP-1 alpha ) , also regulates the growth of hematopoietic stem cells .
We now show that MIP-1 alpha and the related beta chemokine , RANTES , induce transient alterations in intracellular Ca2 + concentration in polymorphonuclear leukocytes that can be reciprocally and specifically desensitized , suggesting a common receptor .
Moreover , we have now cloned both the cDNA and the gene for this receptor , functionally expressed the receptor in Xenopus oocytes , and mapped the gene to human chromosome 3p21 .
Transcripts for the receptor were found in mature and immature myeloid cells as well as B cells .
The receptor is a member of the G protein-coupled receptor superfamily .
It has approximately 33 % amino acid identity with receptors for the alpha chemokine , interleukin 8 , and may be the human homolog of the product of US28 , an open reading frame of human cytomegalovirus .
Expression cloning of a human dual-specificity phosphatase.
Using an expression cloning strategy , we isolated a cDNA encoding a human protein-tyrosine-phosphatase .
Bacteria expressing the kinase domain of the keratinocyte growth factor receptor ( bek\/fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 ) were infected with a fibroblast cDNA library in a phagemid prokaryotic expression vector and screened with a monoclonal anti-phosphotyrosine antibody .
Among several clones showing decreased anti-phosphotyrosine recognition , one displayed phosphatase activity toward the kinase in vitro .
The 4.1-kilobase cDNA encoded a deduced protein of 185 amino acids with limited sequence similarity to the vaccinia virus phosphatase VH1 .
The purified recombinant protein dephosphorylated several activated growth factor receptors , as well as serine-phosphorylated casein , in vitro .
Both serine and tyrosine phosphatase activities were completely abolished by mutagenesis of a single cysteine residue conserved in VH1 and the VH1-related ( VHR ) human protein .
These properties suggest that VHR is capable of regulating intracellular events mediated by both tyrosine and serine phosphorylation .
cDNA cloning and expression of a novel human UDP-N-acetyl-alpha-D-galactosamine. Polypeptide N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase, GalNAc-t3.
The glycosylation of serine and threonine residues during mucin-type O-linked protein glycosylation is carried out by a family of UDP-GalNAc : polypeptide N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferases ( GalNAc-transferase ) .
Previously two members , GalNAc-T1 and - T2 , have been isolated and the genes cloned and characterized .
Here we report the cDNA cloning and expression of a novel GalNAc-transferase termed GalNAc-T3 .
The gene was isolated and cloned based on the identification of a GalNAc-transferase motif ( 61 amino acids ) that is shared between GalNAc-T1 and - T2 as well as a homologous Caenorhabditis elegans gene .
The cDNA sequence has a 633-amino acid coding region indicating a protein of 72.5 kDa with a type II domain structure .
The overall amino acid sequence similarity with GalNAc-T1 and - T2 is approximately 45 % ; 12 cysteine residues that are shared between GalNAc-T1 and - T2 are also found in GalNAc-T3 .
GalNAc-T3 was expressed as a soluble protein without the hydrophobic transmembrane domain in insect cells using a Baculo-virus vector , and the expressed GalNAc-transferase activity showed substrate specificity different from that previously reported for GalNAc-T1 and - T2 .
Northern analysis of human organs revealed a very restricted expression pattern of GalNAc-T3 .
Vasopressin increases water permeability of kidney collecting duct by inducing translocation of aquaporin-CD water channels to plasma membrane.
Water excretion by the kidney is regulated by the peptide hormone vasopressin .
Vasopressin increases the water permeability of the renal collecting duct cells , allowing more water to be reabsorbed from collecting duct urine to blood .
Despite long-standing interest in this process , the mechanism of the water permeability increase has remained undetermined .
Recently , a molecular water channel ( AQP-CD ) has been cloned whose expression appears to be limited to the collecting duct .
Previously , we immunolocalized this water channel to the apical plasma membrane ( APM ) and to intracellular vesicles ( IVs ) of collecting duct cells .
Here , we test the hypothesis that vasopressin increases cellular water permeability by inducing exocytosis of AQP-CD-laden vesicles , transferring water channels from IVs to APM .
Rat collecting ducts were perfused in vitro to determine water permeability and subcellular distribution of AQP-CD in the same tubules .
The collecting ducts were fixed for immunoelectron microscopy before , during , and after exposure to vasopressin .
Vasopressin exposure induced increases in water permeability and the absolute labeling density of AQP-CD in the APM .
In parallel , the APM : IV labeling ratio increased .
Furthermore , in response to vasopressin withdrawal , AQP-CD labeling density in the APM and the APM : IV labeling ratio decreased in parallel to a measured decrease in osmotic water permeability .
We conclude that vasopressin increases the water permeability of collecting duct cells by inducing a reversible translocation of AQP-CD water channels from IVs to the APM .
Cloning and characterization of a novel human clathrin heavy chain gene (CLTCL).
An exon representing a novel clathrin heavy chain gene ( CLTCL ) was isolated during gene identification studies and transcription mapping of human chromosome 22 .
Isolation and sequencing of cDNA clones corresponding to this exon revealed extensive similarity of the predicted amino acid sequence of this gene product to those of clathrin heavy chain genes of other species .
Northern blot analysis has revealed an apparent developmental expression pattern of an approximately 6-kb mRNA .
The gene appears to be expressed ubiquitously in the limited number of fetal tissues that were tested , but is selectively expressed in certain adult tissues , particularly in skeletal muscle .
In addition , alternative splicing of an exon was observed near the carboxyl terminus of the predicted gene product .
Its location overlaps the domain putatively involved in clathrin light chain binding and is adjacent to the heavy chain self-assembly ( or trimerization ) region , suggesting that alternative splicing may be involved in regulating one or both of these interactions .
The expression pattern of this gene , in addition to its potential role in receptor-mediated endocytosis and signal transduction , suggests that it may be important in some developmental processes .
The location of CLTCL on human chromosome 22 near the region commonly deleted in DiGeorge and other apparent haploinsufficiency syndromes warrants further investigation into its relationship with these developmental disorders .
Chromosomal localization of genes encoding the transcription factors, c-rel, NF-kappa Bp50, NF-kappa Bp65, and lyt-10 by fluorescence in situ hybridization.
We have used fluorescence in situ hybridization ( FISH ) to perform precise chromosomal mapping of the genes encoding the transcription factors c-rel , NF-kappa Bp50 , NF-kappa Bp65 , and lyt-10 .
The previously published assignments of c-rel and NF-kappa Bp50 have been refined to specific bands .
The map position of lyt-10 , inferred from its isolation from a t ( 10 ; 14 ) ( q24 ; q32 ) translocation , has been confirmed .
NF-kappa Bp65 has now been mapped to 11q13 , a site of frequent involvement in aberration in multiple tumor types .
Cloning and chromosome mapping of the human interleukin-1 receptor antagonist gene.
By screening a human genomic library with an interleukin-1 receptor antagonist ( IL-1ra ) cDNA probe , we have isolated a 15 kb clone which contains the entire coding region of the gene as expressed in monocytes , and includes 6 kb of 5 ' - upstream sequence .
The gene contains four exons which code for the secreted form of the IL-1ra , however , our clone does not contain the alternative first exon used to generate an intracellular form of the protein as the protein as found in epithelial cells .
Analysis of the sequence reveals a consensus TATA box , and three Alu repeats , two of which are in the upstream region and one in intron 3 .
The sequence also reveals an 86 bp motif tandomly repeated four times within intron 2 , and may reflect the polymorphism known to exist in this region of the gene .
By in-situ fluorescence hybridization we have shown that the IL-1ra gene is found on the long arm of chromosome 2 and maps to 2q13-14 .1 .
Previous studies have revealed that IL-1 alpha , and IL-1 beta and both type I and type II forms of the IL-1 receptor all map close to this region of chromosome 2 .
Bradykinin induces translocation of the protein kinase C isoforms alpha, epsilon, and zeta.
Bradykinin exerts a broad spectrum of cellular effects on different tissues .
It is believed that these effects are predominantly mediated by the recently cloned B2 receptor .
The mechanism of post-receptor signal transduction is not known in detail .
Involvement of protein kinase C ( PKC ) was suggested and activation of the classical PKC isoforms alpha and beta was recently demonstrated .
The aim of the present study was to investigate whether the B2 receptor also activates new ( delta , epsilon ) and atypical ( zeta ) PKC isoforms .
To investigate this , chinese hamster ovary ( CHO ) cells , stably transfected with human B2 receptor , were used .
In these cells the PKC isoforms alpha , delta , epsilon and zeta were detected by immunoblotting with specific antibodies .
To monitor hormone-induced PKC translocation plasma membranes were prepared .
Stimulation of the cells with bradykinin resulted in a rapid ( 30-60 s ) translocation of the PKC isoforms alpha , epsilon , and zeta .
Translocation of PKC delta was not detected .
The effect of bradykinin was reduced by simultaneous addition of the receptor antagonist HOE 140 , a bradykinin-related decapeptide .
The data show that the B2 receptor in this cell model is able to activate , in addition to the classical PKC isoform alpha , the new PKC isoform epsilon and the atypical PKC isoform zeta .
To test whether these effects are as well observed in a non-transfected cell , the experiments were repeated in human foreskin fibroblasts which naturally express high levels of B2 receptors .
In this cell system similar results on PKC alpha , epsilon , and zeta were observed , suggesting that all three PKC isoforms are involved in signal transduction of the B2 receptor .
Syntaphilin: a syntaxin-1 clamp that controls SNARE assembly.
Syntaxin-1 is a key component of the synaptic vesicle docking\/fusion machinery that forms the SNARE complex with VAMP\/synaptobrevin and SNAP-25 .
Identifying proteins that modulate SNARE complex formation is critical for understanding the molecular mechanisms underlying neurotransmitter release and its modulation .
We have cloned and characterized a protein called syntaphilin that is selectively expressed in brain .
Syntaphilin competes with SNAP-25 for binding to syntaxin-1 and inhibits SNARE complex formation by absorbing free syntaxin-1 .
Transient overexpression of syntaphilin in cultured hippocampal neurons significantly reduces neurotransmitter release .
Furthermore , introduction of syntaphilin into presynaptic superior cervical ganglion neurons in culture inhibits synaptic transmission .
These findings suggest that syntaphilin may function as a molecular clamp that controls free syntaxin-1 availability for the assembly of the SNARE complex , and thereby regulates synaptic vesicle exocytosis .
Identification, cloning, and expression of a cytosolic megakaryocyte protein-tyrosine-phosphatase with sequence homology to cytoskeletal protein 4.1.
We have isolated a cDNA encoding a third type of protein-tyrosine-phosphatase .
We screened human megakaryoblastic cell line ( MEG-01 ) an umbilical vein endothelial cell cDNA libraries to obtain a 3.7-kilobase cDNA designated PTPase MEG .
Northern blot analysis of MEG-01 RNA detected a 3.7-kilobase transcript , suggesting that a full-length cDNA has been identified .
PTPase MEG cDNA contains an open reading frame of 926 amino acids .
The cDNA has a G+C - rich 5 ' untranslated region of 771 nucleotides that has the potential to form stable stem-loop structures and has two upstream ATG codons .
The predicted protein ( Mr = 105,910 ) has no apparent membrane-spanning region and contains a single protein-tyrosine-phosphatase domain ( amino acids 659-909 ) that is 35-40 % identical to previously described tyrosine-phosphatase domains .
The recombinant phosphatase domain possesses protein-tyrosine-phosphatase activity when expressed in Escherichia coli .
The amino-terminal region ( amino acids 31-367 ) is 45 % identical to the amino terminus of human erythrocyte protein 4.1 , a cytoskeletal protein .
The identification of a protein-tyrosine-phosphatase that is related to cytoskeletal proteins implies that cell signaling activities reside not only in transmembrane receptors but in cytoskeletal elements as well .
Intracellular parasitism by the human granulocytic ehrlichiosis bacterium through the P-selectin ligand, PSGL-1.
Human granulocytic ehrlichiosis ( HGE ) is a febrile tick-borne illness caused by a recently discovered intracellular bacterium remarkable for its tropism for professionally phagocytic neutrophils .
Monoclonal antibodies against the P-selectin binding domain of the leukocyte P-selectin glycoprotein ligand , PSGL-1 , prevented HGE cell binding and infection , as did enzymatic digestion of PSGL-1 .
Furthermore , simultaneous neoexpression in nonsusceptible cells of complementary DNAs for both PSGL-1 and its modifying alpha - ( 1,3 ) fucosyltransferase , Fuc-TVII , allowed binding and infection by HGE .
Thus , the HGE bacterium specifically bound to fucosylated leukocyte PSGL-1 .
Selectin mimicry is likely central to the organism 's unique ability to target and infect neutrophils .
Osteoprotegerin: a novel secreted protein involved in the regulation of bone density.
A novel secreted glycoprotein that regulates bone resorption has been identified .
The protein , termed Osteoprotegerin ( OPG ) , is a novel member of the TNF receptor superfamily .
In vivo , hepatic expression of OPG in transgenic mice results in a profound yet nonlethal osteopetrosis , coincident with a decrease in later stages of osteoclast differentiation .
These same effects are observed upon administration of recombinant OPG into normal mice .
In vitro , osteoclast differentiation from precursor cells is blocked in a dose-dependent manner by recombinant OPG .
Furthermore , OPG blocks ovariectomy-associated bone loss in rats .
These data show that OPG can act as a soluble factor in the regulation of bone mass and imply a utility for OPG in the treatment of osteoporosis associated with increased osteoclast activity .
Characterization of a novel Src-like adapter protein that associates with the Eck receptor tyrosine kinase.
The Eph family of receptor protein tyrosine kinases ( RPTKs ) is the largest family of RPTKs .
The signal transduction pathways initiated by this family have only recently begun to be explored .
Using a yeast two-hybrid screen to identify molecules that interact with the cytoplasmic domain of Eck , it was previously shown that activated Eck RPTK bound to and stimulated phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase ( Pandey , A. , Lazar , D.F. , Saltiel , A. R. , and Dixit , V.M. ( 1994 ) J. Biol .
Chem .
269 , 30154-30157 ) .
Also isolated from this same screen was a novel protein containing SH3 and SH2 adapter modules that had striking homology to those found in the Src family of non-receptor tyrosine kinases .
However , unlike other Src family members , it lacked a catalytic tyrosine kinase domain .
Hence , this protein was designated SLAP for Src-like adapter protein .
Using glutathione S-transferase fusion Proteins , it was demonstrated that SLAP bound to activated Eck receptor tyrosine kinase .
Therefore , SLAP is a novel candidate downstream signaling intermediate and the first member of the Src family that resembles an adapter molecule .
Cloning and sequencing of the complete cDNA encoding the human insulin receptor related receptor.
The insulin receptor related receptor ( IRR ) is a heterotetrameric transmembrane receptor with intrinsic tyrosine kinase activity .
The IRR shares large homology with the insulin and the insulin-like growth factor-1 ( IGF-I ) receptor with regard to amino acid sequence and protein structure .
So far , only a partial human sequence containing the complete 3 ' end has been reported , although the full-length human IRR cDNA had been used for transfection studies and functional analysis of the receptor .
We have isolated a full-length human IRR cDNA and report on the 5 ' translated and untranslated region of the human IRR gene .
The full length IRR sequence contains 4150 bases and shares a high degree of homology with the guinea pig IRR cDNA sequence and rat IRR sequences that had been reported earlier on by others .
Sequencing of the IRR cDNA revealed that the human IRR cDNA contains 341 bases corresponding to the IRR 5 ' end in addition to the bases that had been reported on before .
Also , this sequence contains the start codon of translation .
The full length cDNA for the human IRR can now be used for functional expression studies and to elucidate the nature of the ligand for this receptor type .
The gene encoding hydroxypyruvate reductase (GRHPR) is mutated in patients with primary hyperoxaluria type II.
Primary hyperoxaluria type II ( PH2 ) is a rare monogenic disorder that is characterized by a lack of the enzyme that catalyzes the reduction of hydroxypyruvate to D-glycerate , the reduction of glyoxylate to glycolate and the oxidation of D-glycerate to hydroxypyruvate .
The disease is characterized by an elevated urinary excretion of oxalate and L-glycerate .
The increased oxalate excretion can cause nephrolithiasis and nephrocalci-nosis and can , in some cases , result in renal failure and systemic oxalate deposition .
We identified a glyoxylate reductase\/hydroxypyruvate reductase ( GRHPR ) cDNA clone from a human liver expressed sequence tag ( EST ) library .
Nucleotide sequence analysis identified a 1198 nucleotide clone that encoded a 984 nucleotide open reading frame .
The open reading frame encodes a predicted 328 amino acid protein with a mass of 35 563 Da .
Transient transfection of the cDNA clone into COS cells verified that it encoded an enzyme with hydroxy-pyruvate reductase , glyoxylate reductase and D-glycerate dehydrogenase enzymatic activities .
Database analysis of human ESTs reveals widespread tissue expression , indicating that the enzyme may have a previously unrecognized role in metabolism .
The genomic structure of the human GRHPR gene was determined and contains nine exons and eight introns and spans approximately 9 kb pericentromeric on chromosome 9 .
Four PH2 patients representing two pairs of siblings from two unrelated families were analyzed for mutations in GRHPR by single strand conformation polymorphism analysis .
All four patients were homozygous for a single nucleotide deletion at codon 35 in exon 2 , resulting in a premature stop codon at codon 45 .
The cDNA that we have identified represents the first characterization of an animal GRHPR sequence .
The data we present will facilitate future genetic testing to confirm the clinical diagnosis of PH2 .
These data will also facilitate heterozygote testing and prenatal testing in families affected with PH2 to aid in genetic counseling .
Structural analysis and expression of human desmoglein: a cadherin-like component of the desmosome.
Desmosomes are adhesive cell junctions found in great abundance in tissues that experience mechanical stress .
The transmembrane desmosomal glycoproteins have been proposed to play a role in cell adhesion ; desmoglein I ( DGI ) is a major member of this class of desmosomal molecules .
However , evidence supporting a role for DGI in cell adhesion or in the plaque is lacking .
In order to begin to understand DGI function we have identified human cDNA clones encoding the entire mature polypeptide of 1000 amino acids .
Our data suggest that like the bovine DGI molecule human DGI is highly related to the calcium-dependent class of cell adhesion molecules known as cadherins .
Four related extracellular domains located in the amino-terminal domain of the molecule contain putative calcium binding sites originally identified in the cadherins .
The highest degree of similarity between human N-cadherin and human DGI , and likewise between bovine DGI and human DGI , is greatest in the most amino-terminal extracellular domain .
This suggests a conserved functional role for the extracellular domains , perhaps in calcium-mediated cell adhesion .
The cytoplasmic portion of the molecule contains a cadherin-like region and , like bovine DGI , a carboxy-terminal tail that is not present in the cadherins , comprising three additional domains .
One of these contains a novel repeating motif of 29 + \/ - 1 residues , first identified in bovine DGI .
Each of the highly homologous repeating units is likely to consist of two beta-strands and two turns with special characteristics .
Five amino acids that are identical in bovine and human DGI lie in the second of the two predicted beta-strands , and intriguingly contain putative target sites for protein kinase C. On the basis of structural analysis , a model predicting the disposition of human DGI domains in the desmosome is proposed .
Northern analysis suggests that unlike bovine epidermis , which expresses a single mRNA of reported size approximately 7.6 kb , human foreskin and cultured keratinocytes display a complex pattern with bands of approximately 7.2 , 4.0 and 3.0 kb .
Each of these cross-hybridizing mRNAs is coordinately expressed in normal human keratinocytes in response to long-term culture and increased calcium .
Spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 mutation alters P-type calcium channel function.
Abnormal CAG repeat expansion in the alpha1A voltage-dependent calcium channel gene is associated with spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 , an autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxia with a predominant loss of the Purkinje cell .
A reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction analysis of mRNA from mouse Purkinje cells revealed a predominant expression of the alpha1A channel lacking an asparagine-proline ( NP ) stretch in the domain IV ( alpha1A ( - NP ) ) .
Human alpha1A channels carrying various polyglutamine length with or without NP were expressed in HEK293 cells , and channel properties were compared using a whole-cell voltage clamp technique .
alpha1A ( - NP ) , corresponding to P-type channel , with 24 and 28 polyglutamines found in patients showed the voltage dependence of inactivation shifting negatively by 6 and 11 mV , respectively , from the 13 polyglutamine control .
Contrarily , the alpha1A channel with NP ( alpha1A ( + NP ) ) , corresponding to Q-type channel , with 28 polyglutamines exhibited a positive shift of 5 mV .
These results suggest that altered function of alpha1A ( - NP ) may contribute to degeneration of Purkinje cells , which express predominantly alpha1A ( - NP ) , due to the reduced Ca ( 2 + ) influx resulting from the negative shift of voltage-dependent inactivation .
On the other hand , other types of neurons , expressing both alpha1A ( - NP ) and alpha1A ( + NP ) , may survive because the positive shift of voltage-dependent inactivation of alpha1A ( + NP ) compensates Ca ( 2 + ) influx .
Primary structure and binding activity of the hnRNP U protein: binding RNA through RGG box.
Heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoproteins ( hnRNPs ) are thought to influence the structure of hnRNA and participate in the processing of hnRNA to mRNA .
The hnRNP U protein is an abundant nucleoplasmic phosphoprotein that is the largest of the major hnRNP proteins ( 120 kDa by SDS-PAGE ) .
HnRNP U binds pre-mRNA in vivo and binds both RNA and ssDNA in vitro .
Here we describe the cloning and sequencing of a cDNA encoding the hnRNP U protein , the determination of its amino acid sequence and the delineation of a region in this protein that confers RNA binding .
The predicted amino acid sequence of hnRNP U contains 806 amino acids ( 88,939 Daltons ) , and shows no extensive homology to any known proteins .
The N-terminus is rich in acidic residues and the C-terminus is glycine-rich .
In addition , a glutamine-rich stretch , a putative NTP binding site and a putative nuclear localization signal are present .
It could not be defined from the sequence what segment of the protein confers its RNA binding activity .
We identified an RNA binding activity within the C-terminal glycine-rich 112 amino acids .
This region , designated U protein glycine-rich RNA binding region ( U-gly ) , can by itself bind RNA .
Furthermore , fusion of U-gly to a heterologous bacterial protein ( maltose binding protein ) converts this fusion protein into an RNA binding protein .
A 26 amino acid peptide within U-gly is necessary for the RNA binding activity of the U protein .
Interestingly , this peptide contains a cluster of RGG repeats with characteristic spacing and this motif is found also in several other RNA binding proteins .
We have termed this region the RGG box and propose that it is an RNA binding motif and a predictor of RNA binding activity .
Identification and characterization of PKNbeta, a novel isoform of protein kinase PKN: expression and arachidonic acid dependency are different from those of PKNalpha.
The cDNA clone encoding a novel isoform of protein kinase PKN , termed PKNbeta , was isolated from a HeLa cDNA library .
PKNbeta had high sequence homology with PKNalpha , originally isolated PKN , especially in the repeats of charged amino acid-rich region with leucine-zipper like sequences ( CZ region\/HR1 ) , in the carboxyl-terminal catalytic domain , and in approximately 130 amino acid stretch ( D region\/HR2 ) , located between CZ region\/HR1 and the catalytic domain .
However , the amino acid sequence of PKNbeta differed from that of PKNalpha in the region immediately amino-terminal to the catalytic domain , which contained two distinct proline-rich sequences consistent with the class II consensus sequence , PXXPXR , for binding to SH3 domain .
Distribution of PKNbeta differed from that of PKNalpha in the following two respects : ( 1 ) Northern blotting indicated that PKNbeta mRNA could not be detected in human adult tissues , but was expressed abundantly in human cancer cell lines ; ( 2 ) immunochemical analysis indicated that PKNbeta localized in nucleus and perinuclear Golgi apparatus , and was almost absent in cytoplasmic region in NIH3T3 cells .
Recombinant PKNbeta expressed in COS7 cells displayed autophosphorylation and peptide kinase activity , but was found to be significantly less responsive to arachidonic acid than PKNalpha .
The identification of this novel isoform underscores the diversity of PKN signaling pathway .
A GLRA1 null mutation in recessive hyperekplexia challenges the functional role of glycine receptors.
Dominant missense mutations in the human glycine receptor ( GlyR ) alpha 1 subunit gene ( GLRA1 ) give rise to hereditary hyperekplexia .
These mutations impair agonist affinities and change conductance states of expressed mutant channels , resulting in a partial loss of function .
In a recessive case of hyperekplexia , we found a deletion of exons 1-6 of the GLRA1 gene .
Born to consanguineous parents , the affected child is homozygous for this GLRA1 ( null ) allele consistent with a complete loss of gene function .
The child displayed exaggerated startle responses and pronounced head-retraction jerks reflecting a disinhibition of vestigial brain-stem reflexes .
In contrast , proprio - and exteroceptive inhibition of muscle activity previously correlated to glycinergic mechanisms were not affected .
This case demonstrates that , in contrast to the lethal effect of a null allele in the recessive mouse mutant oscillator ( Glra1 spd-ot ) , the loss of the GlyR alpha 1 subunit is effectively compensated in man .
Intergenic splicing of MDS1 and EVI1 occurs in normal tissues as well as in myeloid leukemia and produces a new member of the PR domain family.
The EVI1 gene , located at chromosome band 3q26 , is overexpressed in some myeloid leukemia patients with breakpoints either 5 ' of the gene in the t ( 3 ; 3 ) ( q21 ; q26 ) or 3 ' of the gene in the inv ( 3 ) ( q21q26 ) .
EVI1 is also expressed as part of a fusion transcript with the transcription factor AML1 in the t ( 3 ; 21 ) ( q26 ; q22 ) , associated with myeloid leukemia .
In cells with t ( 3 ; 21 ) , additional fusion transcripts are AML1-MDS1 and AML1-MDS1-EVI1 .
MDS1 is located at 3q26 170-400 kb upstream ( telomeric ) of EVI1 in the chromosomal region in which some of the breakpoints 5 ' of EVI1 have been mapped .
MDS1 has been identified as a single gene as well as a previously unreported exon ( s ) of EVI1 We have analyzed the relationship between MDS1 and EVI1 to determine whether they are two separate genes .
In this report , we present evidence indicating that MDS1 exists in normal tissues both as a unique transcript and as a normal fusion transcript with EVI1 , with an additional 188 codons at the 5 ' end of the previously reported EVI1 open reading frame .
This additional region has about 40 % homology at the amino acid level with the PR domain of the retinoblastoma-interacting zinc-finger protein RIZ .
These results are important in view of the fact that EVI1 and MDS1 are involved in leukemia associated with chromosomal translocation breakpoints in the region between these genes .
Ataxin-3, the MJD1 gene product, interacts with the two human homologs of yeast DNA repair protein RAD23, HHR23A and HHR23B.
Machado-Joseph disease ( MJD ) is an autosomal dominant neurodegenerative disorder caused by an expansion of the polyglutamine tract near the C-terminus of the MJD1 gene product , ataxin-3 .
The mutant ataxin-3 forms intranuclear inclusions in cultured cells as well as in diseased human brain and also causes cell death in transfected cells .
However , the normal function of ataxin-3 remains unknown .
To explore the function of ataxin-3 , we used the two-hybrid system to screen for the protein ( s ) that interacts with ataxin-3 .
We found that ataxin-3 interacts with two human homologs of the yeast DNA repair protein RAD23 , HHR23A and HHR23B .
Furthermore , we confirmed that ataxin-3 interacts with the - ubiquitin-like domain at the N-terminus of the HHR23 proteins , which is important for nucleotide excision repair ; however , ataxin-3 does not interact with - ubiquitin , implying that ataxin-3 might be functionally associated with the HHR23 proteins through this specific interaction .
The normal and mutant ataxin-3 proteins show no difference in their ability to bind to the HHR23 proteins .
However , in 293 cells HHR23A is recruited to intranuclear inclusions formed by the mutant ataxin-3 through its interaction with ataxin-3 .
These results suggest that this interaction is associated with the normal function of ataxin-3 and that some functional abnormality of the HHR23 proteins might exist in MJD .
Isolation and chromosomal mapping of a novel human gene showing homology to Na+/PO4 cotransporter.
We isolated a cDNA clone which shows a significant similarity with the renal Na + \/ phosphate cotransporter ( NPT ) from a human intestine mucosa cDNA library .
The cDNA is 2626 bases long , with one open reading frame encoding a protein of 497 amino acids .
The deduced amino acids sequence shows an overall homology of 48 % with the human renal NPT1 protein .
This gene is expressed in intestine , colon , liver , and pancreas .
Thus , this gene may code for intestinal type NPT or closely related proteins .
The chromosomal location of the gene was determined on the chromosome 6p21.3-p22 region by polymerase chain reaction-based analysis with both a human\/rodent mono-chromosomal hybrid cell panel and a radiation hybrid mapping panel .
The human pregnancy-specific beta 1-glycoprotein (PS beta G) and the carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA)-related proteins are members of the same multigene family.
Pregnancy-specific beta 1-glycoprotein ( PS beta G ) , a major product of the placenta with unknown function , consists of a set of glycoproteins synthesized by the syncytiotrophoblast .
We report here the molecular cloning of 3 cDNA encoding different members of the PS beta G family .
Two clones ( C , D ) correspond to a single transcript undergoing differential splicing .
The third one ( E ) originates from a different gene .
All three clones have identical ( C , D ) or similar ( E ) coding sequences except for the last residues at their carboxyl end .
They contain 93 residue motifs related to the ancestral Ig-like domain which makes them new members of this gene superfamily .
A striking sequence similarity ( 50 to 60 % ) is observed between PS beta G and carcinoembryonic antigen ( CEA ) - related proteins .
The evolutionary relationship between CEA and PS beta G points to a possible common function in the control of cell invasion and\/or metastasis .
6-Phosphogluconolactonase deficiency, a hereditary erythrocyte enzyme deficiency: possible interaction with glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency.
Partial deficiency of 6-phosphogluconolactonase ( EC 3.1.1.31 ) of the erythrocytes was discovered as an autosomal dominant disorder .
Hemolytic anemia occurred in an individual who had inherited both the gene for 6-phosphogluconolactonase deficiency and that for deficiency of a nonhemolytic variant of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase ( EC 1.1.1.49 ) .
It is proposed that the interaction of this hereditary erythrocyte abnormality with glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency may explain hemolysis in some other patients who have inherited polymorphic variants of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase .
Human gastric cathepsin E. Predicted sequence, localization to chromosome 1, and sequence homology with other aspartic proteinases.
The predicted sequence of human gastric cathepsin E ( CTSE ) was determined by analysis of cDNA clones isolated from a library constructed with poly ( A + ) RNA from a gastric adenocarcinoma cell line .
The CTSE cDNA clones were identified using a set of complementary 18-base oligonucleotide probes specific for a 6-residue sequence surrounding the first active site of all previously characterized human aspartic proteinases .
Sequence analysis of CTSE cDNA clones revealed a 1188-base pair open reading frame that exhibited 59 % sequence identity with human pepsinogen A. The predicted CTSE amino acid sequence includes a 379-residue proenzyme ( Mr = 40,883 ) and a 17-residue signal peptide .
The predicted CTSE amino acid composition was consistent with that of purified material from gastric mucosa and gastric adenocarcinoma cell lines .
Additional evidence for the identification of the CTSE cDNA clones was obtained by analysis of poly ( A + ) RNA isolated from CTSE-producing and - nonproducing gastric adenocarcinoma cell subclones .
Three RNA transcripts ( 3.6 , 2.6 , and 2.1 kilobases ) were identified in poly ( A + ) RNA isolated from a gastric adenocarcinoma cell line that produced CTSE that were absent from nonproducing subclones .
CTSE contains 7 cysteine residues , of which 6 were localized by comparative maximal alignment analysis with pepsinogen A to conserved residues that form intrachain disulfide bonds .
The seventh cysteine residue of CTSE is located within the activation peptide region of the proenzyme .
We suspect that this residue forms an interchain disulfide bond and thereby determines the dimerization of CTSE proenzyme molecules that is observed under native conditions .
The CTSE gene was localized to human chromosome 1 by concurrent cytogenetic and cDNA probe analyses of a panel of human x mouse somatic cell hybrids .
Repression of transcriptional activity by heterologous KRAB domains present in zinc finger proteins.
We report the characterization of three novel members of the KRAB-domain containing C2-H2 zinc finger family ( ZNF133 , 136 and 140 ) .
KRAB ( Krüppel - associated box ) is an evolutionarily conserved protein domain found N-terminally with respect to the zinc finger repeats that encodes the DNA binding domain .
ZNF133 and ZNF140 have both the KRAB A - and KRAB B-boxes present at their N-terminus , whereas ZNF136 contains only the KRAB A-box .
We have previously demonstrated that the KRAB domains derived from ZNF133 and ZNF140 are potent transcriptional repression domains ( Margolin et al .
( 1994 ) Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA 91 , 4509-4513 ) .
The KRAB domain from ZNF136 , containing only subdomain A , is a considerable weaker suppression domain ; however , when fused to the heterologous KRAB B subdomain of ZNF10 ( KOX1 ) the two subdomains from a KRAB domain which induces repression as potently as previously reported KRAB domains .
Human cytoplasmic 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A synthase: expression, purification, and characterization of recombinant wild-type and Cys129 mutant enzymes.
A cDNA for the human cytoplasmic 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A ( HMG-CoA ) synthase ( EC 4.1.3.5 ) was subcloned and expressed from a T7-based vector in Escherichia coli .
The over-produced enzyme was purified using a three-step protocol that generated 20 to 30 mg protein\/liter cell culture .
The physical and catalytic properties of the recombinant synthase are similar to those reported for the nonrecombinant enzymes from chicken liver ( Clinkenbeard et al .
( 1975a ) J. Biol .
Chem .
250 , 3124-3135 ) and rat liver ( Mehrabian et al .
( 1986 ) J. Biol .
Chem .
261 , 16249-16255 ) .
Mutation of Cys129 to serine or alanine destroys HMG-CoA synthase activity by disrupting the first catalytic step in HMG-CoA synthesis , enzyme acetylation by acetyl coenzyme A. Furthermore , unlike the wild-type enzyme , neither mutant was capable of covalent modification by the beta-lactone inhibitor , L-659 ,699 ( Greenspan et al .
( 1987 ) Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA 84 , 7488-7492 ) .
Kinetic analysis of the inhibition by L-659 ,699 revealed that this compound is a potent inhibitor of the recombinant human synthase , with an inhibition constant of 53.7 nM and an inactivation rate constant of 1.06 min-1 .
Localization of low molecular weight GTP binding proteins to exocytic and endocytic compartments.
A set of 11 clones encoding putative GTP binding proteins highly homologous to the yeast YPT1\/SEC4 gene products have been isolated from an MDCK cell cDNA library .
We localized three of the corresponding proteins in mammalian cells by using affinity-purified antibodies in immunofluorescence and immunoelectron microscopy studies .
One , the MDCK homolog of rab2 , is associated with a structure having the characteristics of an intermediate compartment between the endoplasmic reticulum and the Golgi apparatus .
The second , rab5 , is located at the cytoplasmic surface of the plasma membrane and on early endosomes , while the third , rab7 , is found on late endosomes .
These findings provide evidence that members of the YPT1\/SEC4 subfamily of GTP binding proteins are localized to specific exocytic and endocytic subcompartments in mammalian cells .
Human G(olf) alpha: complementary deoxyribonucleic acid structure and expression in pancreatic islets and other tissues outside the olfactory neuroepithelium and central nervous system.
G ( olf ) alpha is a G-protein originally believed to mediate signal transduction exclusively within the olfactory neuroepithelium and subsequently found to be a major stimulatory G-protein in the basal ganglia .
Here we present evidence that G ( olf ) alpha is expressed in several other tissues .
The human isoform of G ( olf ) alpha was isolated from two human insulinoma cDNA libraries .
Comparison of the human sequence with rat G ( olf ) alpha shows 91 % nucleotide identity ( within the coding region ) and 99 % identity at the amino acid level .
Northern and reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction analyses indicated that G ( olf ) alpha is expressed in all human insulinomas examined thus far as well as in normal pancreatic islets .
G ( olf ) alpha mRNA was also detected in testis , retina , brain , and liver .
Western blot analysis of various mouse tissues demonstrated that the level of G ( olf ) alpha protein in islets is lower than that in the olfactory neuroepithelium and other parts of the brain ; its expression in retina , lung , and spleen was moderately higher than that in islets , and its expression in testis approached that in olfactory neuroepithelium .
G ( olf ) alpha was also detected by immunohistochemistry in mouse islets , human insulinomas , the epithelial lining of mouse epididymis , photoreceptor cells of mouse retina , and mouse lung alveoli .
These findings suggest a role for G ( olf ) alpha in a diverse population of cells located outside the olfactory neuroepithelium and central nervous system .
Human beta-nerve growth factor gene sequence highly homologous to that of mouse.
Nerve growth factor ( NGF ) is thought to have a profound effect on the development and maintenance of sympathetic and embryonic sensory neurones ( see refs 1-3 for review ) .
NGF activity isolated from the male mouse submaxillary gland ( MSG ) consists of three types of subunits , alpha , beta and gamma , which specifically interact to form a 7S , approximately 130,000-molecular weight ( Mr ) complex .
The 7S complex contains two identical 118-amino acid beta-chains , which are solely responsible for the nerve growth-stimulating activity of NGF .
While NGF is found in almost all vertebrates , most research has focused on murine NGF , as the mouse male submaxillary gland contains higher levels of this polypeptide than other tissues .
Even so , beta-NGF comprises only approximately 0.1 % of the protein in this small gland , which has made the study of this polypeptide difficult .
The amino acid sequence of the mouse NGF beta-chain has been determined and some information has been obtained regarding the size of a mouse precursor molecule , pro-beta-NGF , but little was known about the structure and relatedness of beta-NGF from other vertebrates .
Here we describe the isolation of mouse beta-NGF complementary DNA ( cDNA ) and present its nucleotide sequence , which predicts a prepro-beta-NGF molecule of Mr 27,000 ( 27K ) and a pro-beta-NGF molecule of Mr 25K .
We have used the mouse beta-NGF cDNA clone to isolate the human beta-NGF gene , the coding regions of which are highly homologous to the mouse prepro-beta-NGF nucleotide and amino acid sequences .
Molecular cloning and characterization of a transcription factor for the C-type natriuretic peptide gene promoter.
Our previous studies on the promoter function of the human C-type natriuretic peptide ( CNP ) gene revealed the existence of two GC-rich cis elements essential for gene transcription in rat pituitary-derived GH3 cells .
To isolate transcription factors that bind to those GC-rich elements , we screened a lambda ZAP cDNA library derived from GH3 cells by Southwestern screening .
Several positive clones with specific binding abilities were obtained , and one was identical as TSC-22 , a speculated transcriptional modulator stimulated by transforming growth factor beta ( TGF-beta ) of unknown function .
TSC-22 significantly enhanced CNP promoter activity in GH3 cells .
We further cloned a 1.8-kb full-length human TSC-22 cDNA from a fetal kidney cDNA library by a combination of polymerase chain reaction and the rapid amplification of the cDNA ends technique .
In adults , human TSC-22 mRNA was highly expressed in brain , lung and heart .
TSC-22 gene expression in GH3 and human aortic endothelial cells was stimulated by cytokines including TGF-beta , in correlation with the CNP mRNA increase .
These results suggest that TSC-22 is a transcriptional regulator of the CNP gene and transmits signals from cytokines , such as TGF-beta , to CNP gene expression .
LAF-4 encodes a lymphoid nuclear protein with transactivation potential that is homologous to AF-4, the gene fused to MLL in t(4;11) leukemias.
A novel human gene , LAF-4 , was isolated from a subtracted cDNA library that showed strong sequence similarity to AF-4 , a gene that is translocated in t ( 4 ; 11 ) ( q21 ; q23 ) acute lymphoblastic leukemias ( ALLs ) .
In t ( 4 ; 11 ) ALL , the AF-4 gene at 4q21 is translocated into the MLL locus at 11q23 , resulting in the expression of an MLL\/AF -4 fusion protein that is the presumptive oncoprotein .
AF-4 and LAF-4 are homologous throughout their coding regions , yet neither protein is related to previously cloned genes .
Human LAF-4 readily hybridized with genes in mouse and chicken , thus showing that this gene family has been highly conserved during vertebrate evolution .
In mouse tissues , LAF-4 mRNA was found to be present at highest levels in lymphoid tissues , present at lower levels in brain and lung , and absent from other tissues .
In human and mouse lymphoid cell lines , LAF-4 expression was highest in pre-B cells , intermediate in mature B cells , and absent in plasma cells , thus pointing to a potential regulatory role for LAF-4 in lymphoid development .
Antibodies to LAF-4 showed it to be a nuclear protein that showed an uneven , granular immunofluorescence pattern .
In vitro-translated LAF-4 was able to bind strongly to double-stranded DNA cellulose .
Furthermore , both LAF-4 and AF-4 had domains that activated transcription strongly when fused to the GAL4 DNA-binding domain .
Interestingly , the AF-4 transactivation domain is retained in the MLL\/AF -4 fusion protein ; thus , it may contribute to the transforming potential of the oncoprotein .
Therefore , the cloning of LAF-4 has defined a new family of potential regulatory proteins that may function in lymphoid development and oncogenesis .
Purification and cloning of hepatocyte growth factor activator inhibitor type 2, a Kunitz-type serine protease inhibitor.
Hepatocyte growth factor ( HGF ) activator is a serine protease responsible for proteolytic activation of HGF in response to tissue injury and thus plays an important role in the regulation of biological functions of HGF in regenerating tissue .
We previously purified an inhibitor of HGF activator ( HGF activator inhibitor type 1 , HAI-1 ) from the conditioned medium of a human stomach carcinoma cell line MKN45 and cloned its cDNA .
HAI-1 is a novel member of the Kunitz family of serine protease inhibitors .
In the present study , we purified a second type of HGF activator inhibitor ( HAI-2 ) from the conditioned medium of MKN45 cells and molecularly cloned its cDNA .
The cDNA sequence revealed that HAI-2 is derived from a precursor protein of 252 amino acids and contains two Kunitz domains , indicating that HAI-2 is also a member of the Kunitz family of serine protease inhibitors .
The primary translation product of HAI-2 has a hydrophobic sequence in the COOH-terminal region , suggesting that , like HAI-1 , HAI-2 is produced in a membrane-associated form and secreted in a proteolytically truncated form .
Because HAI-2 and HAI-1 are potent inhibitors specific for HGF activator , they may be involved in regulation of proteolytic activation of HGF in injured tissues .
Molecular cloning and sequence analysis of cDNA encoding human ferrochelatase.
The cDNA encoding human ferrochelatase ( EC 4.99.1.1 ) was isolated from a human placenta cDNA library in bacteriophage lambda gt11 by screening with a radiolabeled fragment of mouse ferrochelatase cDNA .
The cDNA had an open reading frame of 1269 base pairs ( bp ) encoding a protein of 423 amino acid residues ( Mr. 47,833 ) with alternative putative polyadenylation signals in the 3 ' non-coding regions and poly ( A ) tails .
Amino acid sequencing showed that the mature protein consists of 369 amino acid residues ( Mr. 42,158 ) with a putative leader sequence of 54 amino acid residues .
The human enzyme showed an 88 % identity to mouse enzyme and 46 % to yeast enzyme .
Northern blot analysis showed two mRNAs of about 2500 and 1600 bp for ferrochelatase in K562 and HepG2 cells .
As full-length cDNA for human ferrochelatase is now available , molecular lesions related to erythropoietic protoporphyria can be characterized .
Molecular cloning, expression and function of the murine CB2 peripheral cannabinoid receptor.
We have cloned the peripheral cannabinoid receptor , mCB2 , from a mouse splenocyte cDNA library .
The 3.7 kb sequence contains an open reading frame encoding a protein of 347 residues sharing 82 % overall identity with the only other known peripheral receptor , human CB2 ( hCB2 ) and shorter than hCB2 by 13 amino acids at the carboxyl terminus .
Binding experiments with membranes from COS-3 cells transiently expressing mCB2 showed that the synthetic cannabinoid WIN 55212-2 had a 6-fold lower affinity for mCB2 than for hCB2 , whereas both receptors showed similar affinities for the agonists CP 55,940 , delta ( 9 ) - THC and anandamide and almost no affinity for the central receptor - ( CB1 ) specific antagonist SR 141716A .
Both hCB2 and mCB2 mediate agonist-stimulated inhibition of forskolin-induced cAMP production in CHO cell lines permanently expressing the receptors .
SR 141716A failed to antagonize this activity in either cell line , confirming its specificity for CB1 .
Identification of endoglycan, a member of the CD34/podocalyxin family of sialomucins.
CD34 and podocalyxin are structurally related sialomucins , which are expressed in multiple tissues including vascular endothelium and hematopoietic progenitors .
These glycoproteins have been proposed to be involved in processes as diverse as glomerular filtration , inhibition of stem cell differentiation , and leukocyte-endothelial adhesion .
Using homologies present in the cytoplasmic tails of these proteins , we have identified a novel member of this family , which we designate endoglycan .
This protein shares a similar overall domain structure with the other family members including a sialomucin domain , but also possesses an extremely acidic amino-terminal region .
In addition , endoglycan contains several potential glycosaminoglycan attachment sites and is modified with chondroitin sulfate .
Endoglycan mRNA and protein were detected in both endothelial cells and CD34 ( + ) bone marrow cells .
Thus , CD34 , podocalyxin , and endoglycan comprise a family of sialomucins sharing both structural similarity and sequence homology , which are expressed by both endothelium and multipotent hematopoietic progenitors .
While the members of this family may perform overlapping functions at these sites , the unique structural features of endoglycan suggest distinct functions for this molecule .
A human homologue of the yeast HDEL receptor.
Retention of resident proteins in the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum is achieved in both yeast and animal cells by their continual retrieval from the cis-Golgi , or a pre-Golgi compartment .
Sorting of these proteins is dependent on a C-terminal tetrapeptide signal , usually Lys-Asp-Glu-Leu ( KDEL in the single letter code ) in animal cells , His-Asp-Glu-Leu ( HDEL ) in Saccharomyces cerevisiae .
There is evidence that the ERD2 gene encodes the sorting receptor that recognizes HDEL in yeast ; its product is an integral membrane protein of relative molecular mass 26,000 ( 26K ) that is not glycosylated .
In contrast , Vaux et al .
suggest that the mammalian KDEL receptor is a 72K glycoprotein that they detected using an anti-idiotypic antibody approach .
If this were so , it would indicate a surprising divergence of the retrieval machinery between yeast and animal cells .
We report here that human cells express a protein similar in sequence , size and properties to the ERD2 product , and propose that this protein is the human KDEL receptor .
Human sprouty 4, a new ras antagonist on 5q31, interacts with the dual specificity kinase TESK1.
The Drosophila melanogaster protein sprouty is induced upon fibroblast growth factor ( FGF ) - and epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) - receptor tyrosine kinase activation and acts as an inhibitor of the ras\/MAP kinase pathway downstream of these receptors .
By differential display RT-PCR of activated vs. resting umbilical artery smooth muscle cells ( SMCs ) we detected a new human sprouty gene , which we designated human sprouty 4 ( hspry4 ) based on its homology with murine sprouty 4 .
Hspry4 is widely expressed and Northern blots indicate that different isoforms of hspry4 are induced upon cellular activation .
The hspry4 gene maps to 5q31 .3 .
It encodes a protein of 322 amino acids , which , in support of a modulating role in signal transduction , contains a prototypic cysteine-rich region , three , potentially Src homology 3 ( SH3 ) binding , proline-rich regions and a PEST sequence .
This new sprouty orthologue can suppress the insulin - and EGF-receptor transduced MAP kinase signaling pathway , but fails to inhibit MAP kinase activation by constitutively active V12 ras .
Hspry4 appears to impair the formation of active GTP-ras and exert its activity at the level of wild-type ras or upstream thereof .
In a yeast two-hybrid screen , using hspry4 as bait , testicular protein kinase 1 ( TESK1 ) was identified from a human fetal liver cDNA library as a partner of hspry4 .
The hspry4-TESK1 interaction was confirmed by coimmunoprecipitation experiments and increases by growth factor stimulation .
The two proteins colocalize in apparent cytoplasmic vesicles and do not show substantial translocation to the plasma membrane upon receptor tyrosine kinase stimulation .
Mutual interactions between subunits of the human RNase MRP ribonucleoprotein complex.
The eukaryotic ribonuclease for mitochondrial RNA processing ( RNase MRP ) is mainly located in the nucleoli and belongs to the small nucleolar ribonucleoprotein ( snoRNP ) particles .
RNase MRP is involved in the processing of pre-rRNA and the generation of RNA primers for mitochondrial DNA replication .
A closely related snoRNP , which shares protein subunits with RNase MRP and contains a structurally related RNA subunit , is the pre-tRNA processing factor RNase P. Up to now , 10 protein subunits of these complexes have been described , designated hPop1 , hPop4 , hPop5 , Rpp14 , Rpp20 , Rpp21 , Rpp25 , Rpp30 , Rpp38 and Rpp40 .
To get more insight into the assembly of the human RNase MRP complex we studied protein-protein and protein-RNA interactions by means of GST pull-down experiments .
A total of 19 direct protein-protein and six direct protein-RNA interactions were observed .
The analysis of mutant RNase MRP RNAs showed that distinct regions are involved in the direct interaction with protein subunits .
The results provide insight into the way the protein and RNA subunits assemble into a ribonucleoprotein particle .
Based upon these data a new model for the architecture of the human RNase MRP complex was generated .
Homeodomain-interacting protein kinases, a novel family of co-repressors for homeodomain transcription factors.
A novel family of cofactors that differentially interact with homeoproteins have been identified via a yeast two-hybrid screen .
The proteins contain a conserved protein kinase domain that is separated from a domain that interacts with homeoproteins and hence are termed homeodomain-interacting protein kinases ( HIPKs ) : HIPK1 , HIPK2 , and HIPK3 .
We show that HIPKs are nuclear kinases using GFP-HIPK fusion constructs .
The DNA binding activity of the NK-3 homeoprotein is greatly enhanced by HIPK2 , but this effect is independent of its phosphorylation by HIPK2 .
In cultured cells , HIPKs localize to nuclear speckles and potentiate the repressor activities of NK homeoproteins .
The co-repressor activity of HIPKs depends on both its homeodomain interaction domain and a co-repressor domain that maps to the N terminus .
Thus , HIPKs represent a heretofore undescribed family of co-repressors for homeodomain transcription factors .
Identification and characterization of a new human ETS-family transcription factor, TEL2, that is expressed in hematopoietic tissues and can associate with TEL1/ETV6.
The ETS family of proteins is a large group of transcription factors implicated in many aspects of normal hematopoietic development , as well as oncogenesis .
For example , the TEL1\/ETV6 ( TEL1 ) gene is required for normal yolk sac angiogenesis , adult bone marrow hematopoiesis , and is rearranged or deleted in numerous leukemias .
This report describes the cloning and characterization of a novel ETS gene that is highly related to TEL1 and is therefore called TEL2 .
The TEL2 gene consists of 8 exons spanning approximately 21 kilobases ( kb ) in human chromosome 6p21 .
Unlike the ubiquitously expressed TEL1 gene , however , TEL2 appears to be expressed predominantly in hematopoietic tissues .
Antibodies raised against the C-terminus of the TEL2 protein were used to show that TEL2 localizes to the nucleus .
All ETS proteins can bind DNA via the highly conserved ETS domain , which recognizes a purine-rich DNA sequence with a GGAA core motif .
DNA binding assays show that TEL2 can bind the same consensus DNA binding sequence recognized by TEL1\/ETV6 .
Additionally , the TEL2 protein is capable of associating with itself and with TEL1 in doubly transfected Hela cells , and this interaction is mediated through the pointed ( PNT ) domain of TEL1 .
The striking similarities of TEL2 to the oncogenic TEL1 , its expression in hematopoietic tissues , and its ability to associate with TEL1 suggest that TEL2 may be an important hematopoietic regulatory protein .
SAP30, a novel protein conserved between human and yeast, is a component of a histone deacetylase complex.
Histone acetylation plays a key role in the regulation of eukaryotic gene expression .
Recently , histone acetylation and deacetylation were found to be catalyzed by structurally distinct , multisubunit complexes that mediate , respectively , activation and repression of transcription .
Here , we identify SAP30 as a novel component of the human histone deacetylase complex that includes Sin3 , the histone deacetylases HDAC1 and HDAC2 , histone binding proteins RbAp46 and RbAp48 , as well as other polypeptides .
Moreover , we describe a SAP30 homolog in yeast that is functionally related to Sin3 and the histone deacetylase Rpd3 .
The human SAP30 complex is active in deacetylating core histone octamers , but inactive in deacetylating nucleosomal histones due to the inability of the histone binding proteins RbAp46 and RbAp48 to gain access to nucleosomal histones .
These results define SAP30 as a component of a histone deacetylase complex conserved among eukaryotic organisms .
Negative regulation of protein translation by mitogen-activated protein kinase-interacting kinases 1 and 2.
Eukaryotic initiation factor 4E ( eIF4E ) is a key component of the translational machinery and an important modulator of cell growth and proliferation .
The activity of eIF4E is thought to be regulated by interaction with inhibitory binding proteins ( 4E-BPs ) and phosphorylation by mitogen-activated protein ( MAP ) kinase-interacting kinase ( MNK ) on Ser209 in response to mitogens and cellular stress .
Here we demonstrate that phosphorylation of eIF4E via MNK1 is mediated via the activation of either the Erk or p38 pathway .
We further show that expression of active mutants of MNK1 and MNK2 in 293 cells diminishes cap-dependent translation relative to cap-independent translation in a transient reporter assay .
The same effect on cap-dependent translation was observed when MNK1 was activated by the Erk or p38 pathway .
In line with these findings , addition of recombinant active MNK1 to rabbit reticulocyte lysate resulted in a reduced protein synthesis in vitro , and overexpression of MNK2 caused a decreased rate of protein synthesis in 293 cells .
By using CGP 57380 , a novel low-molecular-weight kinase inhibitor of MNK1 , we demonstrate that eIF4E phosphorylation is not crucial to the formation of the initiation complex , mitogen-stimulated increase in cap-dependent translation , and cell proliferation .
Our results imply that activation of MNK by MAP kinase pathways does not constitute a positive regulatory mechanism to cap-dependent translation .
Instead , we propose that the kinase activity of MNKs , eventually through phosphorylation of eIF4E , may serve to limit cap-dependent translation under physiological conditions .
p63, a p53 homolog at 3q27-29, encodes multiple products with transactivating, death-inducing, and dominant-negative activities.
We describe the cloning of p63 , a gene at chromosome 3q27-29 that bears strong homology to the tumor suppressor p53 and to the related gene , p73 .
p63 was detected in a variety of human and mouse tissues , including proliferating basal cells of epithelial layers in the epidermis , cervix , urothelium , and prostate .
Unlike p53 , the p63 gene encodes multiple isotypes with remarkably divergent abilities to transactivate p53 reporter genes and induce apoptosis .
Importantly , the predominant p63 isotypes in many epithelial tissues lack an acidic N terminus corresponding to the transactivation domain of p53 .
We demonstrate that these truncated p63 variants can act as dominant-negative agents toward transactivation by p53 and p63 , and we suggest the possibility of physiological interactions among members of the p53 family .
A striking organization of a large family of human neural cadherin-like cell adhesion genes.
We have identified 52 novel human cadherin-like genes organized into three closely linked clusters .
Comparison of the genomic DNA sequences with those of representative cDNAs reveals a striking genomic organization similar to that of immunoglobulin and T cell receptor gene clusters .
The N-terminal extracellular and transmembrane domains of each cadherin protein are encoded by a distinct and unusually large exon .
These exons are organized in a tandem array .
By contrast , the C-terminal cytoplasmic domain of each protein is identical and is encoded by three small exons located downstream from the cluster of N-terminal exons .
This unusual organization has interesting implications regarding the molecular code required to establish complex networks of neuronal connections in the brain and the mechanisms of cell-specific cadherin-like gene expression .
The Fanconi anemia protein FANCF forms a nuclear complex with FANCA, FANCC and FANCG.
Fanconi anemia ( FA ) is a chromosomal instability syndrome associated with a strong predisposition to cancer , particularly acute myeloid leukemia and squamous cell carcinoma .
At the cellular level , FA is characterized by spontaneous chromosomal breakage and a unique hypersensitivity to DNA cross-linking agents .
Complementation analysis has indicated that at least seven distinct genes are involved in the pathogenesis of FA .
Despite the identification of four of these genes ( FANCA , FANCC , FANCF and FANCG ) , the nature of the ` FA pathway ' has remained enigmatic , as the FA proteins lack sequence homologies or motifs that could point to a molecular function .
To further define this pathway , we studied the subcellular localizations and mutual interactions of the FA proteins , including the recently identified FANCF protein , in human lymphoblasts .
FANCF was found predominantly in the nucleus , where it complexes with FANCA , FANCC and FANCG .
These interactions were detected in wild-type and FA-D lymphoblasts , but not in lymphoblasts of other FA complementation groups .
This implies that each of the FA proteins , except FANCD , is required for these complexes to form .
Similarly , we show that the interaction between FANCA and FANCC is restricted to wild-type and FA-D cells .
Furthermore , we document the subcellular localization of FANCA and the FANCA\/FANCG complex in all FA complementation groups .
Our results , along with published data , culminate in a model in which a multi-protein FA complex serves a nuclear function to maintain genomic integrity .
Functional cloning of Src-like adapter protein-2 (SLAP-2), a novel inhibitor of antigen receptor signaling.
In an effort to identify novel therapeutic targets for autoimmunity and transplant rejection , we developed and performed a large-scale retroviral-based functional screen to select for proteins that inhibit antigen receptor-mediated activation of lymphocytes .
In addition to known regulators of antigen receptor signaling , we identified a novel adaptor protein , SLAP-2 which shares 36 % sequence similarity with the known Src-like adaptor protein , SLAP .
Similar to SLAP , SLAP-2 is predominantly expressed in hematopoietic cells .
Overexpression of SLAP-2 in B and T cell lines specifically impaired antigen receptor-mediated signaling events , including CD69 surface marker upregulation , nuclear factor of activated T cells ( NFAT ) promoter activation and calcium influx .
Signaling induced by phorbol myristate acetate ( PMA ) and ionomycin was not significantly reduced , suggesting SLAP-2 functions proximally in the antigen receptor signaling cascade .
The SLAP-2 protein contains an NH2-terminal myristoylation consensus sequence and SH3 and SH2 Src homology domains , but lacks a tyrosine kinase domain .
In antigen receptor-stimulated cells , SLAP-2 associated with several tyrosine phosphorylated proteins , including the ubiquitin ligase Cbl .
Deletion of the COOH terminus of SLAP-2 blocked function and abrogated its association with Cbl .
Mutation of the putative myristoylation site of SLAP-2 compromised its inhibitory activity and impaired its localization to the membrane compartment .
Our identification of the negative regulator SLAP-2 demonstrates that a retroviral-based screening strategy may be an efficient way to identify and characterize the function of key components of many signal transduction systems .
CHMP1 is a novel nuclear matrix protein affecting chromatin structure and cell-cycle progression.
The Polycomb-group ( PcG ) is a diverse set of proteins required for maintenance of gene silencing during development .
In a screen for conserved partners of the PcG protein Polycomblike ( Pcl ) , we have identified a new protein , human CHMP1 ( CHromatin Modifying Protein ; CHarged Multivesicular body Protein ) , which is encoded by an alternative open reading frame in the PRSM1 gene and is conserved in both complex and simple eukaryotes .
CHMP1 contains a predicted bipartite nuclear localization signal and distributes as distinct forms to the cytoplasm and the nuclear matrix in all cell lines tested .
We have constructed a stable HEK293 cell line that inducibly overexpresses CHMP1 under ecdysone control .
Overexpressed CHMP1 localizes to a punctate subnuclear pattern , encapsulating regions of nuclease-resistant , condensed chromatin .
These novel structures are also frequently surrounded by increased histone H3 phosphorylation and acetylation .
CHMP1 can recruit a PcG protein , BMI1 , to these regions of condensed chromatin and can cooperate with co-expressed vertebrate Pcl in a Xenopus embryo PcG assay ; this is consistent with a role in PcG function .
In combination , these observations suggest that CHMP1 plays a role in stable gene silencing within the nucleus .
Identification of cDNAs encoding two novel nuclear proteins, IMUP-1 and IMUP-2, upregulated in SV40-immortalized human fibroblasts.
Using a model system of young , senescent and SV40-immortalized WI-38 fibroblasts , we identified two mRNAs upregulated in immortalized cells ( imup-1 , immortalization-upregulated protein 1 , and imup-2 ) .
Compared to normal tissues , both genes were more frequently expressed in cancer cells .
The open reading frame of imup-1 spans 321bp , coding for a 10.9 kDa protein of 106 amino acids , while an insertion of 59bp in the otherwise identical mRNA of imup-2 leads to a frameshift , resulting in an 8.5 kDa protein of 85 amino acids .
Database searches identified these genes on chromosome 19 , which could account for the cloned imup-1 and imup-2 transcripts by alternative splicing .
Southern blot analysis of digested genomic DNA confirmed that both transcripts are derived from a single locus .
The expressed proteins IMUP-1 and IMUP-2 share 46 identical N-terminal amino acids , whereas the C-termini are unrelated .
Green fluorescent protein-fusions of both IMUP-1 and IMUP-2 accumulated in the nucleus of HeLa cells .
The C-terminus of IMUP-1 contains a bipartite nuclear localization signal , the deletion of which impaired nuclear translocation .
In-vitro translated proteins bound to poly ( rG ) , but did not interact with single-stranded DNA or double-stranded DNA .
The nuclear localization of IMUP-1 and IMUP-2 as well as the upregulation of both underlying mRNAs in immortalized cells suggest a function in immortalization .
The cysteine- and glycine-rich LIM domain protein CRP2 specifically interacts with a novel human protein (CRP2BP).
We used the interaction trap to isolate a novel human protein that specifically interacts with the double LIM domain protein CRP2 .
This protein , designated CRP2BP ( for CRP2 binding partner ) , was previously postulated by sequencing contigs of human chromosome 20 .
The observed interaction is mediated via the LIM1 domain of CRP2 and is of functional relevance in cellular environment .
This novel single copy gene spans approximately 45-bp and is organized into at least ten exons .
CRP2BP is expressed in all human tissues tested , with a major mRNA of 4-kb in size and an additional 3.2-kb transcript in placenta .
Cloning and characterization of CRF, a novel C1q-related factor, expressed in areas of the brain involved in motor function.
We have isolated and characterized a novel cDNA , C1q-Related Factor ( CRF ) , that is predicted to encode a 258 amino acid polypeptide with a hydrophobic signal sequence , a collagenous region , and a globular domain at the carboxy terminus that shares homology to the C1q signature domain .
Human CRF transcript is expressed at highest levels in the brain , particularly in the brainstem .
In situ hybridization to mouse brain sections demonstrated that CRF transcripts are most abundant in areas of the nervous system involved in motor function , such as the Purkinje cells of the cerebellum , the accessory olivary nucleus , the pons and the red nucleus .
The mouse CRF homolog is highly similar to the human gene at both the nucleotide and protein level , suggesting an important conserved role for this protein .
Isolation and characterization of cDNA clones for Humly9: the human homologue of mouse Ly9.
Ly9 is a mouse cell membrane antigen found on all lymphocytes and coded for by a gene that maps to chromosome 1 .
We previously described the isolation and characterization of a full-length cDNA clone for mouse Ly9 .
Using cross-species hybridization we isolated cDNA clones encoding the human homolog Humly9 .
Analysis of the predicted protein sequence suggests that the extra-cellular portion of the Humly9 molecules is composed of four Ig-like domains : a V domain ( V ) without disulphide bonds and a truncated C2 domain ( tC2 ) with two disulphide bonds , a second V domain without disulphide bonds and a second tC2 with two disulphide bonds , i.e. , as V-tC2-V-tC2 .
The gene encoding Humly9 was mapped to chromosome 1 by analysis of human\/hamster hybrids , and more specifically to the 1q22 region by in situ hybridization .
The protein sequence data support the view that Humly9 belongs to the immunoglobulin-superfamily subgroup which includes CD48 , CD2 , and LFA-3 .
Cloning and functional expression of two families of beta-subunits of the large conductance calcium-activated K+ channel.
We report here a characterization of two families of calcium-activated K ( + ) channel beta-subunits , beta2 and beta3 , which are encoded by distinct genes that map to 3q26.2-27 .
A single beta2 family member and four alternatively spliced variants of beta3 were investigated .
These subunits have predicted molecular masses of 27 .
1-31 .6 kDa , share approximately 30-44 % amino acid identity with beta1 , and exhibit distinct but overlapping expression patterns .
Coexpression of the beta2 or beta3a-c subunits with a BK alpha-subunit altered the functional properties of the current expressed by the alpha-subunit alone .
The beta2 subunit rapidly and completely inactivated the current and shifted the voltage dependence for activation to more polarized membrane potentials .
In contrast , coexpression of the beta3a-c subunits resulted in only partial inactivation of the current , and the beta3b subunit conferred an apparent inward rectification .
Furthermore , unlike the beta1 and beta2 subunits , none of the beta3 subunits increased channel sensitivity to calcium or voltage .
The tissue-specific expression of these beta-subunits may allow for the assembly of a large number of distinct BK channels in vivo , contributing to the functional diversity of native BK currents .
Identification of human CD93 as the phagocytic C1q receptor (C1qRp) by expression cloning.
CD93 is a approximately 120 kDa O-sialoglycoprotein that within the hematopoietic system is selectively expressed on cells of the myeloid lineage .
So far , its primary structure and function were unknown .
We used retroviral-expression cloning to isolate the CD93 cDNA .
Sequence analysis revealed that CD93 is identical to a protein on human phagocytes termed C1q receptor ( C1qRp ) .
C1qRp was shown previously to mediate enhancement of phagocytosis in monocytes and was suggested to be a receptor of C1q and two other structurally related molecules .
When studying CD93 transductants and control cells , we found that cells expressing CD93 have enhanced capacity to bind C1q .
Furthermore , we show that immature dendritic cells ( DC ) express CD93\/C1qRp , and mature DC , known to have reduced capacity for antigen uptake and to have lost the ability to phagocytose , show weak-to-negative CD93\/C1qRp expression .
GABA(A)-receptor-associated protein links GABA(A) receptors and the cytoskeleton.
Type-A receptors for the neurotransmitter GABA ( gamma-aminobutyric acid ) are ligand-gated chloride channels that mediate inhibitory neurotransmission .
Each subunit of the pentameric receptor protein has ligand-binding sites in the amino-terminal extracellular domain and four membrane-spanning regions , one of which forms a wall of the ion channel .
Each subunit also has a large intracellular loop that may be a target for protein kinases and be required for subcellular targeting and membrane clustering of the receptor , perhaps by anchoring the receptor to the cytoskeleton .
Neurotransmitter receptors need to be positioned in high density in the cell membrane at sites postsynaptic to nerve terminals releasing that neurotransmitter .
Other members of the superfamily of ligand-gated ion-channel receptors associate in postsynaptic-membrane clusters by binding to the proteins rapsyn or gephyrin .
Here we identify a new cellular protein , GABA ( A ) - receptor-associated protein ( GABARAP ) , which can interact with the gamma2 subunit of GABA ( A ) receptors .
GABARAP binds to GABA ( A ) receptors both in vitro and in vivo , and co-localizes with the punctate staining of GABA ( A ) receptors on cultured cortical neurons .
Sequence analysis shows similarity between GABARAP and light chain-3 of microtubule-associated proteins 1A and 1B .
Moreover , the N terminus of GABARAP is highly positively charged and features a putative tubulin-binding motif .
The interactions among GABA ( A ) receptors , GABARAP and tubulin suggest a mechanism for the targeting and clustering of GABA ( A ) receptors .
Identification of the human crooked neck gene by comparative gene identification.
Drosophila melanogaster serves as a useful model organism for functional genomic studies , and its genome project was recently completed .
We previously described a comparative-gene-identification approach to assist human ortholog gene identification that involves applying an entire proteome as an alignment template .
Analysis of the available 14100 Drosophila protein sequences revealed that 37 % of them ( 5228 sequences ) might lead to discoveries of novel human genes .
Upon further database interrogations , we found several putative full-length human gene transcripts , including the human crooked neck ( crn ) gene .
Based on sequence gap-closure experiments using reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction as well as bioinformatic analysis , we found that the assembled human cDNA contig of crooked neck gene was at least 3903 base pairs in length with alternative splicing variations which encoded mainly for a 687-amino-acid residue protein .
The human crooked neck gene was located on chromosome 20 with at least 15 exons .
The unique features of the 16 copies of the tetratrico peptide repeat ( TPR ) motif were conserved in the yeast , fly and human crooked neck orthologous proteins , which were important for spliceosome assembly in cells .
Regulation of chromatin structure by site-specific histone H3 methyltransferases.
The organization of chromatin into higher-order structures influences chromosome function and epigenetic gene regulation .
Higher-order chromatin has been proposed to be nucleated by the covalent modification of histone tails and the subsequent establishment of chromosomal subdomains by non-histone modifier factors .
Here we show that human SUV39H1 and murine Suv39h1 -- mammalian homologs of Drosophila Su ( var ) 3-9 and of Schizosaccharomyces pombe clr4 -- encode histone H3-specific methyltransferases that selectively methylate lysine 9 of the amino terminus of histone H3 in vitro .
We mapped the catalytic motif to the evolutionarily conserved SET domain , which requires adjacent cysteine-rich regions to confer histone methyltransferase activity .
Methylation of lysine 9 interferes with phosphorylation of serine 10 , but is also influenced by pre-existing modifications in the amino terminus of H3 .
In vivo , deregulated SUV39H1 or disrupted Suv39h activity modulate H3 serine 10 phosphorylation in native chromatin and induce aberrant mitotic divisions .
Our data reveal a functional interdependence of site-specific H3 tail modifications and suggest a dynamic mechanism for the regulation of higher-order chromatin .
Cargo of kinesin identified as JIP scaffolding proteins and associated signaling molecules.
The cargo that the molecular motor kinesin moves along microtubules has been elusive .
We searched for binding partners of the COOH terminus of kinesin light chain , which contains tetratricopeptide repeat ( TPR ) motifs .
Three proteins were found , the c-jun NH ( 2 ) - terminal kinase ( JNK ) - interacting proteins ( JIPs ) JIP-1 , JIP-2 , and JIP-3 , which are scaffolding proteins for the JNK signaling pathway .
Concentration of JIPs in nerve terminals requires kinesin , as evident from the analysis of JIP COOH-terminal mutants and dominant negative kinesin constructs .
Coprecipitation experiments suggest that kinesin carries the JIP scaffolds preloaded with cytoplasmic ( dual leucine zipper-bearing kinase ) and transmembrane signaling molecules ( the Reelin receptor , ApoER2 ) .
These results demonstrate a direct interaction between conventional kinesin and a cargo , indicate that motor proteins are linked to their membranous cargo via scaffolding proteins , and support a role for motor proteins in spatial regulation of signal transduction pathways .
Functional coherence of the human Y chromosome.
A systematic search of the nonrecombining region of the human Y chromosome ( NRY ) identified 12 novel genes or families , 10 with full-length complementary DNA sequences .
All 12 genes , and six of eight NRY genes or families previously isolated by less systematic means , fell into two classes .
Genes in the first group were expressed in many organs ; these housekeeping genes have X homologs that escape X inactivation .
The second group , consisting of Y-chromosomal gene families expressed specifically in testes , may account for infertility among men with Y deletions .
The coherence of the NRY 's gene content contrasts with the apparently haphazard content of most eukaryotic chromosomes .
Human mitochondrial thioredoxin reductase cDNA cloning, expression and genomic organization.
We have isolated a 1918-bp cDNA from a human adrenal cDNA library which encodes a novel thioredoxin reductase ( TrxR2 ) of 521 amino acid residues with a calculated molecular mass of 56.2 kDa .
It is highly homologous to the previously described cytosolic enzyme ( TrxR1 ) , including the conserved active site CVNVGC and the FAD-binding and NADPH-binding domains .
However , human TrxR2 differs from human TrxR1 by the presence of a 33-amino acid extension at the N-terminus which has properties characteristic of a mitochondrial translocation signal .
Northern-blot analysis identified one mRNA species of 2.2 kb with highest expression in prostate , testis and liver .
We expressed human TrxR2 as a fusion protein with green fluorescent protein and showed that in vivo it is localized in mitochondria .
Removal of the mitochondrial targeting sequence abolishes the mitochondrial translocation .
Finally , we determined the genomic organization of the human TrxR2 gene , which consists of 18 exons spanning about 67 kb , and its chromosomal localization at position 22q11 .2 .
Role of TRAF3 and -6 in the activation of the NF-kappa B and JNK pathways by X-linked ectodermal dysplasia receptor.
X-linked ectodermal dysplasia receptor ( XEDAR ) is a recently isolated member of the tumor necrosis factor receptor family that has been shown to be highly expressed in ectodermal derivatives during embryonic development and binds to ectodysplasin-A2 ( EDA-A2 ) .
By using a subclone of 293F cells with stable expression of XEDAR , we report that XEDAR activates the NF-kappaB and JNK pathways in an EDA-A2-dependent fashion .
Treatment with EDA-A2 leads to the recruitment of TRAF3 and -6 to the aggregated XEDAR complex , suggesting a central role of these adaptors in the proximal aspect of XEDAR signaling .
Whereas TRAF3 and -6 , IKK1\/IKKalpha , IKK2\/IKKbeta , and NEMO\/IKKgamma are involved in XEDAR-induced NF-kappaB activation , XEDAR-induced JNK activation seems to be mediated via a pathway dependent on TRAF3 , TRAF6 , and ASK1 .
Deletion and point mutagenesis studies delineate two distinct regions in the cytoplasmic domain of XEDAR , which are involved in binding to TRAF3 and -6 , respectively , and play a major role in the activation of the NF-kappaB and JNK pathways .
Taken together , our results establish a major role of TRAF3 and -6 in XEDAR signaling and in the process of ectodermal differentiation .
Cloning, characterization, and expression of the human TIN-ag-RP gene encoding a novel putative extracellular matrix protein.
The human gene encoding a novel tubulointerstitial nephritis antigen ( TIN-ag ) - related protein ( TIN-ag-RP ) was isolated , and its genomic organization was determined .
BLAST searches revealed the highest degree of homology to several mammalian TIN-ag orthologues , and a weak homology to cathepsin B-like proteases .
The 12 kb gene was mapped by fluorescence in situ hybridization to chromosome 1p34.2-3 , a locus neither related to that of the human TIN-ag ( 6p11.2-12 ) nor to that of cathepsin B ( 8p22-23 .1 ) .
The TIN-ag-RP is encoded in ten exons with introns ranging from 83 bp to 4 kb .
In addition , the gene contained one exon in the 5 ` UTR , but none in the 3 ` UTR .
Five of the 10 splice sites of the TIN-ag-RP gene were fully conserved when compared to a related gene of C. elegans , whereas only one splice site was identical to those found in cathepsin B genes .
Furthermore , human TIN-ag-RP tagged with the T7-epitope , was expressed in HeLa cells , and was found to be localized in vesicular compartments as well as secreted into the medium suggesting the involvement of the endosomal trafficking pathway .
Based on the high degree of homology of the amino acid sequences and genomic organization between TIN-ag-RP and TIN-ag , we suggest that both molecules may form a distinct group or family of TIN-ag-like proteins .
Cloning and characterization of human DDX24 and mouse Ddx24, two novel putative DEAD-Box proteins, and mapping DDX24 to human chromosome 14q32.
DEAD-box proteins are a large group of putative RNA helicases that exist ubiquitously in organisms ranging from bacteria to humans .
They are likely to play important roles in many different RNA metabolic processes .
In this paper , we report the cloning of human DDX24 , a putative DEAD-box protein , and its ortholog , Ddx24 in mouse .
The deduced proteins encoded by these two cDNAs share 78.7 % identity at the amino acid level and possess all the well-conserved motifs of DEAD-box proteins .
However , little homology can be found between them and other DEAD-box proteins , even in their core region ( identity ( 40 % ) .
Northern blot analysis showed that a 3.0-kb transcript of human DDX24 exists ubiquitously in the 16 human tissues examined and was most abundant in heart and brain , but with lowest levels in thymus and small intestine .
The mouse Ddx24 , whose transcript is 4.0 kb , was also expressed widely in 10 tissues tested with the highest level in heart and testis .
By radiation hybrid mapping , the human DDX24 gene was localized to human chromosome 14q32 between the markers D14S81 and D14S265 .
Moreover , the gene structure of DDX24 was determined by comparing its cDNA and genomic sequence from BAC R-1089B7 , which showed that the gene spanned a 30-kb region and consisted of at least nine exons .
Identification, cloning, expression, and biochemical characterization of the testis-specific RNA polymerase II elongation factor ELL3.
The human ELL gene , which is a frequent target for translocation in acute myeloid leukemia , was initially isolated from rat liver nuclei and found to be an RNA polymerase II elongation factor .
Based on homology to ELL , we later cloned ELL2 and demonstrated that it can also increase the catalytic rate of transcription elongation by RNA polymerase II .
To better understand the role of ELL proteins in the regulation of transcription by RNA polymerase II , we have initiated a search for proteins related to ELLs .
In this report , we describe the molecular cloning , expression , and characterization of ELL3 , a novel RNA polymerase II elongation factor approximately 50 % similar to both ELL and ELL2 .
Our transcriptional studies have demonstrated that ELL3 can also increase the catalytic rate of transcription elongation by RNA polymerase II .
The C-terminal domain of ELL , which we recently demonstrated to be required and sufficient for the immortalization of myeloid progenitor cells , shares strong similarities to the C-terminal domain of ELL3 .
ELL3 was localized by immunofluorescence to the nucleus of cells , and Northern analysis indicated that ELL3 is a testis-specific RNA polymerase II elongation factor .
The AVIT protein family. Secreted cysteine-rich vertebrate proteins with diverse functions.
Homologues of a protein originally isolated from snake venom and frog skin secretions are present in many vertebrate species .
They contain 80-90 amino acids , 10 of which are cysteines with identical spacing .
Various names have been given to these proteins , such as mamba intestinal protein 1 ( MIT1 ) , Bv8 ( Bombina variegata molecular mass approximately 8 kDa ) , prokineticins and endocrine-gland vascular endothelial growth factor ( EG-VEGF ) .
Their amino-terminal sequences are identical , and so we propose that the sequence of their first four residues , AVIT , is used as a name for this family .
From a comparison of the sequences , two types of AVIT proteins can be discerned .
These proteins seem to be distributed widely in mammalian tissues and are known to bind to G-protein-coupled receptors .
Members of this family have been shown to stimulate contraction of the guinea pig ileum , to cause hyperalgesia after injection into rats and to be active as specific growth factors .
Moreover , the messenger RNA level of one of these AVIT proteins changes rhythmically in the region of the brain known as the suprachiasmatic nucleus .
This shows that members of this new family of small proteins are involved in diverse biological processes .
A soluble class II cytokine receptor, IL-22RA2, is a naturally occurring IL-22 antagonist.
IL-22 is an IL-10 homolog that binds to and signals through the class II cytokine receptor heterodimer IL-22RA1 \/ CRF2-4 .
IL-22 is produced by T cells and induces the production of acute-phase reactants in vitro and in vivo , suggesting its involvement in inflammation .
Here we report the identification of a class II cytokine receptor designated IL-22RA2 ( IL-22 receptor-alpha 2 ) that appears to be a naturally expressed soluble receptor .
IL-22RA2 shares amino acid sequence homology with IL-22RA1 ( also known as IL-22R , zcytor11 , and CRF2-9 ) and is physically adjacent to IL-20Ralpha and IFN-gammaR1 on chromosome 6q23.3-24 .2 .
We demonstrate that IL-22RA2 binds specifically to IL-22 and neutralizes IL-22-induced proliferation of BaF3 cells expressing IL-22 receptor subunits .
IL-22RA2 mRNA is highly expressed in placenta and spleen by Northern blotting .
PCR analysis using RNA from various tissues and cell lines showed that IL-22RA2 was expressed in a range of tissues , including those in the digestive , female reproductive , and immune systems .
In situ hybridization revealed the dominant cell types expressing IL-22RA2 were mononuclear cells and epithelium .
Because IL-22 induces the expression of acute phase reactants , IL-22RA2 may play an important role as an IL-22 antagonist in the regulation of inflammatory responses .
Cloning and characterization of a novel human hepatocyte transcription factor, hB1F, which binds and activates enhancer II of hepatitis B virus.
Enhancer II ( ENII ) of hepatitis B virus ( HBV ) is one of the essential cis-elements for the transcriptional regulation of HBV gene expression .
Its function is highly liver-specific , suggesting that liver-enriched transcriptional factors play critical roles in regulating the activity of ENII .
In this report , a novel hepatocyte transcription factor , which binds specifically to the B1 region ( AACGACCGACCTTGAG ) within the major functional unit ( B unit ) of ENII , has been cloned from a human liver cDNA library by yeast one-hybrid screening , and demonstrated to trans-activate ENII via the B1 region .
We named this factor hB1F , for human B1-binding factor .
Amino acid analysis revealed this factor structurally belongs to nuclear receptor superfamily .
Based on the sequence similarities , hB1F is characterized to be a novel human homolog of the orphan receptor fushi tarazu factor I ( FTZ-F1 ) .
Using reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction , a splicing isoform of hB1F ( hB1F-2 ) was identified , which has an extra 46 amino acid residues in the A\/B region .
Examination of the tissue distribution has revealed an abundant 5.2-kilobase transcript of hB1F is present specifically in human pancreas and liver .
Interestingly , an additional transcript of 3.8 kilobases was found to be present in hepatoma cells HepG2 .
Fluorescent in situ hybridization has mapped the gene locus of hB1F to the region q31-32 .1 of human chromosome 1 .
Altogether , this study provides the first report that a novel human homolog of FTZ-F1 binds and regulates ENII of HBV .
The potential roles of this FTZ-F1 homolog in tissue-specific gene regulation , in embryonic development , as well as in liver carcinogenesis are discussed .
PEX19 binds multiple peroxisomal membrane proteins, is predominantly cytoplasmic, and is required for peroxisome membrane synthesis.
Peroxisomes are components of virtually all eukaryotic cells .
While much is known about peroxisomal matrix protein import , our understanding of how peroxisomal membrane proteins ( PMPs ) are targeted and inserted into the peroxisome membrane is extremely limited .
Here , we show that PEX19 binds a broad spectrum of PMPs , displays saturable PMP binding , and interacts with regions of PMPs required for their targeting to peroxisomes .
Furthermore , mislocalization of PEX19 to the nucleus leads to nuclear accumulation of newly synthesized PMPs .
At steady state , PEX19 is bimodally distributed between the cytoplasm and peroxisome , with most of the protein in the cytoplasm .
We propose that PEX19 may bind newly synthesized PMPs and facilitate their insertion into the peroxisome membrane .
This hypothesis is supported by the observation that the loss of PEX19 results in degradation of PMPs and\/or mislocalization of PMPs to the mitochondrion .
Interleukin-1 type II receptor: a decoy target for IL-1 that is regulated by IL-4.
Interleukin-1 ( IL-1 ) interacts with cells through two types of binding molecules , IL-1 type I receptor ( IL-1R I ) and IL-1R II .
The function of IL-1R II is unknown .
In studies using monoclonal antibodies , IL-1 prolonged the in vitro survival of polymorphonuclear cells ( PMN ) through IL-1R I , and IL-4 antagonized the action of IL-1 by inducing expression and release of IL-1R II .
Dexamethasone also induced expression and release of the IL-1R II in PMN .
These results , together with the effect of antibodies to IL-1R on IL-1-induced production of cytokines in monocytes , indicate that IL-1 acts on myelomonocytic cells through IL-1R I and that IL-1R II inhibits IL-1 activity by acting as a decoy target for IL-1 .
The existence of multiple pathways of regulation emphasizes the need for tight control of IL-1 action .
Rab6 is phosphorylated in thrombin-activated platelets by a protein kinase C-dependent mechanism: effects on GTP/GDP binding and cellular distribution.
In platelets and other secretory cells , protein kinase C ( PKC ) plays a role in exocytosis stimulated by physiological extracellular signals , although its linkage to the secretory machinery is poorly understood .
We investigated whether Rab6 , a GTP-binding protein that fractionates with platelet alpha-granules , may be involved in linking these processes .
We found that Rab6 contains two PKC consensus phosphorylation sites that are evolutionarily conserved .
In platelets metabolically labeled with ( ( 32 ) P ) P ( i ) , Rab6 phosphorylation was induced by phorbol esters or by thrombin .
This phosphorylation was blocked by a specific PKC inhibitor ( Ro-31-8220 ) , but not by a p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase inhibitor ( PD-169316 ) .
Physiological stimulation of platelets caused a PKC-dependent translocation of Rab6 from platelet particulate fractions , nearly doubling the fraction of Rab6 in the cytosol .
A human Rab6 isoform ( Rab6C ) that is preferentially expressed in human platelet RNA was cloned and its phosphorylation by PKC was characterized .
Rab6C incorporated up to 2 mol of ( ( 32 ) P ) P ( i ) per mol of active protein .
Rab6C bound GDP and GTP with K ( d ) values of 113 + \/ -12 and 119 + \/ -27 nM respectively , and hydrolysed GTP at a rate of 100 + \/ -15 micromol of GTP\/mol of Rab6C per min .
PKC phosphorylation of Rab6C increased the affinity for GTP by 3-fold , although it had lesser effects on GDP ( 1.6-fold ) .
Phosphorylation did not alter the GTPase activity .
In summary , thrombin activation of platelets leads to PKC-dependent phosphorylation of Rab6 and a translocation of Rab6 to the cytosol .
We suggest that PKC phosphorylation may be an important mechanism through which Rab functional interactions in vesicle trafficking and secretion can be altered in response to an external stimulus .
Expression pattern in brain of TASK-1, TASK-3, and a tandem pore domain K(+) channel subunit, TASK-5, associated with the central auditory nervous system.
TWIK-related acid-sensitive K ( + ) ( TASK ) channels contribute to setting the resting potential of mammalian neurons and have recently been defined as molecular targets for extracellular protons and volatile anesthetics .
We have isolated a novel member of this subfamily , hTASK-5 , from a human genomic library and mapped it to chromosomal region 20q12-20q13 .
hTASK-5 did not functionally express in Xenopus oocytes , whereas chimeric TASK-5 \/ TASK-3 constructs containing the region between M1 and M3 of TASK-3 produced K ( + ) selective currents .
To better correlate TASK subunits with native K ( + ) currents in neurons the precise cellular distribution of all TASK family members was elucidated in rat brain .
A comprehensive in situ hybridization analysis revealed that both TASK-1 and TASK-3 transcripts are most strongly expressed in many neurons likely to be cholinergic , serotonergic , or noradrenergic .
In contrast , TASK-5 expression is found in olfactory bulb mitral cells and Purkinje cells , but predominantly associated with the central auditory pathway .
Thus , TASK-5 K ( + ) channels , possibly in conjunction with auxiliary proteins , may play a role in the transmission of temporal information in the auditory system .
Paip1 interacts with poly(A) binding protein through two independent binding motifs.
The 3 ' poly ( A ) tail of eukaryotic mRNAs plays an important role in the regulation of translation .
The poly ( A ) binding protein ( PABP ) interacts with eukaryotic initiation factor 4G ( eIF4G ) , a component of the eIF4F complex , which binds to the 5 ' cap structure .
The PABP-eIF4G interaction brings about the circularization of the mRNA by joining its 5 ' and 3 ' termini , thereby stimulating mRNA translation .
The activity of PABP is regulated by two interacting proteins , Paip1 and Paip2 .
To study the mechanism of the Paip1-PABP interaction , far-Western , glutathione S-transferase pull-down , and surface plasmon resonance experiments were performed .
Paip1 contains two binding sites for PABP , PAM1 and PAM2 ( for PABP-interacting motifs 1 and 2 ) .
PAM2 consists of a 15-amino-acid stretch residing in the N terminus , and PAM1 encompasses a larger C-terminal acidic-amino-acid-rich region .
PABP also contains two Paip1 binding sites , one located in RNA recognition motifs 1 and 2 and the other located in the C-terminal domain .
Paip1 binds to PABP with a 1:1 stoichiometry and an apparent K ( d ) of 1.9 nM .
Cloning and functional characterization of novel large conductance calcium-activated potassium channel beta subunits, hKCNMB3 and hKCNMB4.
We present the cloning and characterization of two novel calcium-activated potassium channel beta subunits , hKCNMB3 and hKCNMB4 , that are enriched in the testis and brain , respectively .
We compare and contrast the steady state and kinetic properties of these beta subunits with the previously cloned mouse beta1 ( mKCNMB1 ) and the human beta2 subunit ( hKCNMB2 ) .
Once inactivation is removed , we find that hKCNMB2 has properties similar to mKCNMB1 .
hKCNMB2 slows Hslo1 channel gating and shifts the current-voltage relationship to more negative potentials .
hKCNMB3 and hKCNMB4 have distinct effects on slo currents not observed with mKCNMB1 and hKCNMB2 .
Although we found that hKCNMB3 does interact with Hslo channels , its effects on Hslo1 channel properties were slight , increasing Hslo1 activation rates .
In contrast , hKCNMB4 slows Hslo1 gating kinetics , and modulates the apparent calcium sensitivity of Hslo1 .
We found that the different effects of the beta subunits on some Hslo1 channel properties are calcium-dependent .
mKCNMB1 and hKCNMB2 slow activation at 1 microM but not at 10 microM free calcium concentrations .
hKCNMB4 decreases Hslo1 channel openings at low calcium concentrations but increases channel openings at high calcium concentrations .
These results suggest that beta subunits in diverse tissue types fine-tune slo channel properties to the needs of a particular cell .
The neural cell recognition molecule neurofascin interacts with syntenin-1 but not with syntenin-2, both of which reveal self-associating activity.
Neurofascin belongs to the L1 subgroup of the immunoglobulin superfamily of cell adhesion molecules and is implicated in axonal growth and fasciculation .
We used yeast two-hybrid screening to identify proteins that interact with neurofascin intracellularly and therefore might link it to trafficking , spatial targeting , or signaling pathways .
Here , we demonstrate that rat syntenin-1 , previously published as syntenin , mda-9 , or TACIP18 in human , is a neurofascin-binding protein that exhibits a wide-spread tissue expression pattern with a relative maximum in brain .
Syntenin-1 was found not to interact with other vertebrate members of the L1 subgroup such as L1 itself or NrCAM .
We confirmed the specificity of the neurofascin-syntenin-1 interaction by ligand-overlay assay , surface plasmon resonance analysis , and colocalization of both proteins in heterologous cells .
The COOH terminus of neurofascin was mapped to interact with the second PDZ domain of syntenin-1 .
Furthermore , we isolated syntenin-2 that may be expressed in two isoforms .
Despite their high sequence similarity to syntenin-1 , syntenin-2alpha , which interacts with neurexin I , and syntenin-2beta do not bind to neurofascin or several other transmembrane proteins that are binding partners of syntenin-1 .
Finally , we report that syntenin-1 and -2 both form homodimers and can interact with each other .
TIRP, a novel Toll/interleukin-1 receptor (TIR) domain-containing adapter protein involved in TIR signaling.
The Toll\/interleukin -1 receptor ( TIR ) family members play important roles in host defense .
These receptors signal through TIR domain-containing adapter proteins .
In this report , we identified a novel TIR domain-containing adapter protein designated as TIRP .
Co-immunoprecipitation experiments suggest that TIRP is associated with IL-1 receptors .
TIRP also interacts with kinase-inactive mutants of IRAK and IRAK-4 , IRAK-2 , IRAK-M , and TRAF6 .
Overexpression of TIRP activates NF-kappaB and potentiates IL-1 receptor-mediated NF-kappaB activation .
A dominant negative mutant of TIRP inhibits IL-1 - but not tumor necrosis factor-triggered NF-kappaB activation .
Moreover , TIRP-mediated NF-kappaB activation is inhibited by dominant negative mutants of IRAK , IRAK-2 , TRAF6 , and IKKbeta .
Our findings suggest that TIRP is involved in IL-1-triggered NF-kappaB activation and functions upstream of IRAK , IRAK-2 , TRAF6 , and IKKbeta
ZK1, a novel Krüppel-type zinc finger gene, is induced following exposure to ionizing radiation and enhances apoptotic cell death on hematopoietic cells.
To identify and early response factor by exposure to ionizing radiation , we cloned the cDNA of a novel Krüppel - type zinc finger ( ZNF ) gene , ZK1 , from a cDNA library constructed from the human leukemia cell line , CMK86 , using degenerate primers .
This cDNA encoded a protein of 671 amino acids with an A box of Krüppel - associated box ( KRAB ) domain at the N-terminus , followed by 15 ZNF motifs .
The expression level of the ZK1 mRNA in human leukemia cells lines , CMK86 and U937 , was increased after exposure to ionizing radiation .
Furthermore , murine myeloid precursor 32D cells that were stably transfected with ZK1 cDNA had higher sensitivity to ionizing radiation than the 32D parent cells .
These data suggest that the ZK1 gene is one of early response genes by exposure to ionizing radiation , and may have some functions on radiation-induced apoptotic cell death on hematopoietic cells .
Molecular cloning and characterization of human FGF-20 on chromosome 8p21.3-p22.
The fibroblast growth factors ( FGFs ) play important roles in morphogenesis , angiogenesis , tissue remodeling , and carcinogenesis .
Human FGF-20 has been cloned and characterized in this study .
FGF-20 encodes a 211-amino-acid polypeptide with the FGF-core domain .
A strong hydrophobic region was found in the FGF-core domain of FGF-20 ; however , no typical N-terminal signal sequence was found in FGF-20 , just as in FGF-9 and FGF-16 .
Total amino acid identities are as follows : FGF-20 vs FGF-9 , 71.6 % ; FGF-20 vs FGF-16 , 66.2 % ; FGF-9 vs FGF-16 , 72.4 % .
Phylogenic analysis indicated that FGF-20 , FGF-9 , and FGF-16 constitute a subfamily among the FGF family .
FGF-20 mRNA of 2.4 kb in size was detected in colon cancer cell line SW480 by Northern blot analysis .
Lower levels of FGF-20 mRNA were detected in human fetal tissues and primary cancers by cDNA-PCR .
The nucleotide sequence of FGF-20 cDNA is split into three parts in the human genome sequence of the chromosome 8p21.3-p22 region ( Accession No. .
AB020858 ) .
These results indicate that the FGF-20 gene , located on human chromosome 8p21.3-p22 , consists of three exons .
Compared with the nucleotide sequence of FGF-20 cDNA determined in this study , one nucleotide deletion and one nucleotide substitution in the putative coding region were identified in human genome sequence AB020858 .
cDNA sequence and chromosomal localization of the remaining three human nuclear encoded iron sulphur protein (IP) subunits of complex I: the human IP fraction is completed.
NADH : ubiquinone oxidoreductase ( complex I ) of the mitochondrial respiratory chain can be fragmented in a flavoprotein ( FP ) , iron-sulfur protein ( IP ) , and hydrophobic protein ( HP ) subfraction .
The IP subfraction is hypothesized to be significant , since it contains important prosthetic groups highly conserved among species .
We cloned the cDNA of three remaining human NADH : ubiquinone oxidoreductase subunits of this IP fraction : the NDUFS2 ( 49 kDa ) , NDUFS3 ( 30 kDa ) , and NDUFS6 ( 13 kDa ) subunits .
All presented cDNAs include the complete open reading frame ( ORF ) , which consist of 1392 , 795 , and 375 base pairs , coding for 463 , 264 , and 124 amino acids , respectively .
The latter show 96 , 90 , and 83 % homology with the corresponding bovine translation products .
The 3 ' untranslated regions ( UTR ) are complete in all three cDNAs .
Polymerase chain reaction performed with DNA isolated from somatic human-rodent cell hybrids containing defined human chromosomes as template gave a human-specific signal which mapped the NDUFS2 and NDUFS3 subunits to chromosomes 1 and 11 , respectively .
In the case of the NDUFS6 subunit a pseudogene may be present since signals were seen in the lanes containing chromosomes 5 and 6 .
The NDUFS2 contains a highly conserved protein kinase C phosphorylation site and the NDUFS3 subunit contains a highly conserved casein kinase II phosphorylation site which make them strong candidates for future mutation detection studies in enzymatic complex I-deficient patients .
XAB2, a novel tetratricopeptide repeat protein involved in transcription-coupled DNA repair and transcription.
Nucleotide excision repair is a highly versatile DNA repair system responsible for elimination of a wide variety of lesions from the genome .
It is comprised of two subpathways : transcription-coupled repair that accomplishes efficient removal of damage blocking transcription and global genome repair .
Recently , the basic mechanism of global genome repair has emerged from biochemical studies .
However , little is known about transcription-coupled repair in eukaryotes .
Here we report the identification of a novel protein designated XAB2 ( XPA-binding protein 2 ) that was identified by virtue of its ability to interact with XPA , a factor central to both nucleotide excision repair subpathways .
The XAB2 protein of 855 amino acids consists mainly of 15 tetratricopeptide repeats .
In addition to interacting with XPA , immunoprecipitation experiments demonstrated that a fraction of XAB2 is able to interact with the transcription-coupled repair-specific proteins CSA and CSB as well as RNA polymerase II .
Furthermore , antibodies against XAB2 inhibited both transcription-coupled repair and transcription in vivo but not global genome repair when microinjected into living fibroblasts .
These results indicate that XAB2 is a novel component involved in transcription-coupled repair and transcription .
FENS-1 and DFCP1 are FYVE domain-containing proteins with distinct functions in the endosomal and Golgi compartments.
FENS-1 and DFCP1 are recently discovered proteins containing one or two FYVE-domains respectively .
We show that the FYVE domains in these proteins can bind PtdIns3P in vitro with high specificity over other phosphoinositides .
Exogenously expressed FENS-1 localises to early endosomes : this localisation requires an intact FYVE domain and is sensitive to wortmannin inhibition .
The isolated FYVE domain of FENS-1 also localises to endosomes .
These results are consistent with current models of FYVE-domain function in this cellular compartment .
By contrast , exogenously expressed DFCP1 displays a predominantly Golgi , endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) and vesicular distribution with little or no overlap with FENS-1 or other endosomal markers .
Overexpression of DFCP1 was found to cause dispersal of the Golgi compartment defined by giantin and gpp130-staining .
Disruption of the FYVE domains of DFCP1 causes a shift to more condensed and compact Golgi structures and overexpression of this mutant was found to confer significant protection to the Golgi against brefeldin-induced dispersal .
These properties of DFCP1 are surprising , and suggest FYVE domain-localisation and function may not be exclusively endosomal .
Movies available on-line
A 1.1-Mb transcript map of the hereditary hemochromatosis locus.
In the process of positionally cloning a candidate gene responsible for hereditary hemochromatosis ( HH ) , we constructed a 1.1-Mb transcript map of the region of human chromosome 6p that lies 4.5 Mb telomeric to HLA-A .
A combination of three gene-finding techniques , direct cDNA selection , exon trapping , and sample sequencing , were used initially for a saturation screening of the 1.1-Mb region for expressed sequence fragments .
As genetic analysis further narrowed the HH candidate locus , we sequenced completely 0.25 Mb of genomic DNA as a final measure to identify all genes .
Besides the novel MHC class 1-like HH candidate gene HLA-H , we identified a family of five butyrophilin-related sequences , two genes with structural similarity to a type 1 sodium phosphate transporter , 12 novel histone genes , and a gene we named RoRet based on its strong similarity to the 52-kD Ro\/SSA lupus and Sjogren 's syndrome auto-antigen and the RET finger protein .
Several members of the butyrophilin family and the RoRet gene share an exon of common evolutionary origin called B30-2 .
The B30-2 exon was originally isolated from the HLA class 1 region , yet has apparently '' shuffled '' into several genes along the chromosome telomeric to the MHC .
The conservation of the B30-2 exon in several novel genes and the previously described amino acid homology of HLA-H to MHC class 1 molecules provide further support that this gene-rich region of 6p21 .3 is related to the MHC .
Finally , we performed an analysis of the four approaches for gene finding and conclude that direct selection provides the most effective probes for cDNA screening , and that as much as 30 % of ESTs in this 1.1-Mb region may be derived from noncoding genomic DNA .
A stress response pathway from the endoplasmic reticulum to the nucleus requires a novel bifunctional protein kinase/endoribonuclease (Ire1p) in mammalian cells.
Eukaryotes respond to the presence of unfolded protein in the endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) by up-regulating the transcription of genes encoding ER protein chaperones , such as BiP .
We have isolated a novel human cDNA encoding a homolog to Saccharomyces cerevisiae Ire1p , a proximal sensor for this signal transduction pathway in yeast .
The gene product hIre1p is a type 1 transmembrane protein containing a cytoplasmic domain that is highly conserved to the yeast counterpart having a Ser\/Thr protein kinase domain and a domain homologous to RNase L. However , the luminal domain has extensively diverged from the yeast gene product .
hIre1p expressed in mammalian cells displayed intrinsic autophosphorylation activity and an endoribonuclease activity that cleaved the 5 ' splice site of yeast HAC1 mRNA , a substrate for the endoribonuclease activity of yeast Ire1p .
Overexpressed hIre1p was localized to the ER with particular concentration around the nuclear envelope and some colocalization with the nuclear pore complex .
Expression of Ire1p mRNA was autoregulated through a process that required a functional hIre1p kinase activity .
Finally , overexpression of wild-type hIre1p constitutively activated a reporter gene under transcriptional control of the rat BiP promoter , whereas expression of a catalytically inactive hIre1p acted in a trans-dominant-negative manner to prevent transcriptional activation of the BiP promoter in response to ER stress induced by inhibition of N-linked glycosylation .
These results demonstrate that hIre1p is an essential proximal sensor of the unfolded protein response pathway in mammalian cells .
Human corneal GlcNac 6-O-sulfotransferase and mouse intestinal GlcNac 6-O-sulfotransferase both produce keratan sulfate.
Human corneal N-acetylglucosamine 6-O-sulfotransferase ( hCGn6ST ) has been identified by the positional candidate approach as the gene responsible for macular corneal dystrophy ( MCD ) .
Because of its high homology to carbohydrate sulfotransferases and the presence of mutations of this gene in MCD patients who lack sulfated keratan sulfate in the cornea and serum , hCGn6ST protein is thought to be a sulfotransferase that catalyzes sulfation of GlcNAc in keratan sulfate .
In this report , we analyzed the enzymatic activity of hCGn6ST by expressing it in cultured cells .
A lysate prepared from HeLa cells transfected with an intact form of hCGn6ST cDNA or culture medium from cells transfected with a secreted form of hCGn6ST cDNA showed an activity of transferring sulfate to C-6 of GlcNAc of synthetic oligosaccharide substrates in vitro .
When hCGn6ST was expressed together with human keratan sulfate Gal-6-sulfotransferase ( hKSG6ST ) , HeLa cells produced highly sulfated carbohydrate detected by an anti-keratan sulfate antibody 5D4 .
These results indicate that hCGn6ST transfers sulfate to C-6 of GlcNAc in keratan sulfate .
Amino acid substitutions in hCGn6ST identical to changes resulting from missense mutations found in MCD patients abolished enzymatic activity .
Moreover , mouse intestinal GlcNAc 6-O-sulfotransferase had the same activity as hCGn6ST .
This observation suggests that mouse intestinal GlcNAc 6-O-sulfotransferase is the orthologue of hCGn6ST and functions as a sulfotransferase to produce keratan sulfate in the cornea .
Human MT6-matrix metalloproteinase: identification, progelatinase A activation, and expression in brain tumors.
The localization of proteolytic enzymes at the cell surface is a widely used strategy for facilitating tumor invasion .
In this study , we have cloned a new member of the membrane-type subfamily of matrix metalloproteinases ( MT-MMPs ) , a group of enzymes associated with tumor progression .
The cloned cDNA encodes a protein of 562 amino acids with a domain organization similar to that of other MT-MMPs , including a prodomain with a cysteine switch , a catalytic domain with the zinc-binding site , a hemopexin-like domain , and a COOH-terminal extension rich in hydrophobic residues .
The predicted protein sequence also contains a short insertion of basic residues located between the propeptide and the catalytic domain and involved in the proteolytic activation of MT-MMPs by furin-like enzymes .
Furthermore , immunofluorescence and Western blot analysis of COS-7 cells transfected with the isolated cDNA revealed that the encoded protein is localized at the cell surface .
Based on these properties , this novel human matrix metalloproteinase has been called MT6-MMP because it is the sixth identified member of this subfamily of matrix metalloproteinase .
Cotransfection of expression plasmids encoding MT6-MMP and progelatinase A resulted in activation of COS-7-secreted progelatinase A , as demonstrated by gelatin zymography .
In contrast , transfection of progelatinase A cDNA alone did not lead to the activation of the proenzyme .
Northern blot analysis of polyadenylated RNAs isolated from human tissues demonstrated that MT6-MMP is predominantly expressed in leukocytes , lung , and spleen .
MT6-MMP was also detected at high levels in SW480 colon carcinoma cells as well as in some anaplastic astrocytomas and glioblastomas , but not in normal colon or brain or in meningiomas .
On the basis of these results , we propose that MT6-MMP may facilitate tumor progression through its ability to activate progelatinase A at the membrane of cells from colon carcinomas or brain tumors .
The WFDC1 gene encoding ps20 localizes to 16q24, a region of LOH in multiple cancers.
We previously identified ps20 protein as a secreted growth inhibitor and purified the protein from fetal rat prostate urogenital sinus mesenchymal cell conditioned medium .
The rat cDNA was subsequently cloned , and ps20 was found to contain a WAP-type four-disulfide core motif , indicating it may function as a protease inhibitor .
We now report cloning and characterization of the mouse ps20 gene ( designated Wfdc1 ) , the human homolog cDNA , and the human gene ( designated WFDC1 ) .
Both the mouse and human WFDC1 genes consist of seven exons and encode respective ps20 proteins sharing 79.1 % identity and nearly identical WAP motifs in exon 2 .
The WFDC1 gene was mapped by FISH analysis to human Chromosome ( Chr ) 16q24 , an area of frequent loss of heterozygosity ( LOH ) previously identified in multiple cancers including prostate , breast , hepatocellular , and Wilms ' tumor .
Identification and characterization of the WFDC1 gene may aid in better understanding the potential role of this gene and ps20 in prostate biology and carcinogenesis .
Cloning and characterization of a novel human pH-dependent organic cation transporter, OCTN1.
cDNA for a novel proton\/organic cation transporter , OCTN1 , was cloned from human fetal liver and its transport activity was investigated .
OCTN1 encodes a 551-amino acid protein with 11 transmembrane domains and one nucleotide binding site motif .
It is strongly expressed in kidney , trachea , bone marrow and fetal liver and in several human cancer cell lines , but not in adult liver .
When expressed in HEK293 cells , OCTN1 exhibited saturable and pH-dependent ( 3H ) tetraethyl ammonium uptake with higher activity at neutral and alkaline pH than at acidic pH. .
Furthermore , treatment with metabolic inhibitors reduced the uptake , which is consistent with the presence of the nucleotide binding site sequence motif .
Although its subcellular localization and detailed functional characteristics are not clear at present , OCTN1 appears to be a novel proton antiporter that functions for active secretion of cationic compounds across the renal epithelial brush-border membrane .
It may play a role in the renal excretion of xenobiotics and their metabolites .
Cloning, localisation and functional expression of a novel human, cerebellum specific, two pore domain potassium channel.
We have isolated , by degenerate PCR , a complementary DNA encoding a novel two pore domain potassium channel .
This is the 7th functional member of the human tandem pore domain potassium channel family to be reported .
It has an open reading frame of 1.125 kb and encodes a 374 amino acid protein which shows 62 % identity to the human TASK-1 gene : identity to other human members of the family is 31-35 % at the amino acid level .
We believe this gene to be human TASK-3 , the ortholog of the recently reported rat TASK-3 gene : amino acid identity between the two is 74 % .
` Taqman ' mRNA analysis demonstrated a very specific tissue distribution pattern , showing human TASK-3 mRNA to be localized largely in the cerebellum , in contrast rat TASK-3 was reported to be widely distributed .
We have shown by radiation hybrid mapping that human TASK-3 can be assigned to chromosome 8q24 .3 .
Human TASK-3 was demonstrated to endow Xenopus oocytes with a negative resting membrane potential through the presence of a large K ( + ) selective conductance .
TASK-3 is inhibited by extracellular acidosis with a mid-point of inhibition around pH 6 .
5 , supporting the predictions from the sequence data that this is a third human TASK ( TWIK-related acid sensitive K ( + ) channel ) gene .
Activation of NK cell-mediated cytotoxicity by a SAP-independent receptor of the CD2 family.
Some CD2 family receptors stimulate NK cell-mediated cytotoxicity through a signaling pathway , which is dependent on the recruitment of an adapter protein called SLAM-associated protein ( SAP ) .
In this work we identify a novel leukocyte cell surface receptor of the CD2 family called CD2-like receptor activating cytotoxic cells ( CRACC ) .
CRACC is expressed on cytotoxic lymphocytes , activated B cells , and mature dendritic cells , and activates NK cell-mediated cytotoxicity .
Remarkably , although CRACC displays cytoplasmic motifs similar to those recruiting SAP , CRACC-mediated cytotoxicity occurs in the absence of SAP and requires activation of extracellular signal-regulated kinases-1 \/ 2 .
Thus , CRACC is a unique CD2-like receptor which mediates NK cell activation through a SAP-independent extracellular signal-regulated kinase-mediated pathway .
Identification of a novel Ran binding protein 2 related gene (RANBP2L1) and detection of a gene cluster on human chromosome 2q11-q12.
The giant 358-kDa protein Ran binding protein 2 ( RanBP2\/Nup358 ) is localized at the cytoplasmic side of the nuclear pore complex and likely constitutes the Ran-GTP binding site at the cytoplasmic face of the complex .
RanBP2\/Nup358 furthermore acts as a chaperone for red\/green opsin molecules .
Here , we report on the physical mapping of human RanBP2 between markers D2S340 and D2S1893 .
A duplication of the 5 ' - end sequence of RanBP2 occurs within 3 Mb distal to RanBP2 .
Detailed sequence analysis resulted in primers specific for this distal duplication .
Polymerase chain reaction-based screening of cDNA libraries indicates that this transcript , called RanBP2alpha ( HGMW-approved symbol RANBP2L1 ) , is expressed in several tissues .
Screening of a fetal brain cDNA library yielded a 4057-bp partial cDNA clone for RanBP2alpha .
Its 5 ' - end is almost identical to RanBP2 , whereas its 3 ' - part is distinct from RanBP2 .
Northern blot analysis using a probe of the 3 ' - untranslated sequence of RanBP2alpha detected in several tissues an 8-kb transcript representing the full length of the transcript .
In pancreas and placenta , an additional transcript of 14 kb was detected .
PAC clones containing the bona fide RanBP2 sequences were localized to 2q11-q12 by FISH analysis , and a region of high similarity was detected on 2p11-p12 .
In summary , we have identified a RanBP2 gene cluster on 2q11-q12 together with a novel gene termed RanBP2alpha , with high sequence similarity to RanBP2 .
A coregulatory role for the TRAP-mediator complex in androgen receptor-mediated gene expression.
The human thyroid hormone receptor-associated protein ( TRAP ) - Mediator complex was originally identified as a large multimeric complex that copurifies with the thyroid hormone receptor ( TR ) from HeLa cells and markedly enhances TR-mediated transcription in vitro .
More recent studies have implicated TRAP-Mediator as a coactivator for a broad range of nuclear hormone receptors as well as other classes of transcriptional activators .
Here we present evidence that TRAP-Mediator plays a functional role in androgen receptor ( AR ) - mediated transcription .
We show that several subunits of the complex ligand-dependently coimmunoprecipitate with AR from both prostate cancer LNCaP cells and from HeLa cells stably transfected with AR .
The 220-kDa subunit of the complex ( TRAP220 ) can contact the ligand-binding domain of AR in vitro , possibly implicating TRAP220 involvement in targeting AR to the holocomplex .
Consistent with a TRAP-Mediator coactivator role , transient overexpression of the TRAP220 , TRAP170 , and TRAP100 subunits enhanced ligand-dependent transcription by AR in cultured cells .
Finally , chromatin immunoprecipitation assays show that TRAP220 is recruited to the androgen-responsive prostate-specific antigen gene promoter in vivo in ligand-stimulated LNCaP cells .
Collectively , these data suggest that TRAP-Mediator may play an important coregulatory role in AR-mediated gene expression .
TACC1-chTOG-Aurora A protein complex in breast cancer.
The three human TACC ( transforming acidic coiled-coil ) genes encode a family of proteins with poorly defined functions that are suspected to play a role in oncogenesis .
A Xenopus TACC homolog called Maskin is involved in translational control , while Drosophila D-TACC interacts with the microtubule-associated protein MSPS ( Mini SPindleS ) to ensure proper dynamics of spindle pole microtubules during cell division .
We have delineated here the interactions of TACC1 with four proteins , namely the microtubule-associated chTOG ( colonic and hepatic tumor-overexpressed gene ) protein ( ortholog of Drosophila MSPS ) , the adaptor protein TRAP ( tudor repeat associator with PCTAIRE2 ) , the mitotic serine\/threonine kinase Aurora A and the mRNA regulator LSM7 ( Like-Sm protein 7 ) .
To measure the relevance of the TACC1-associated complex in human cancer we have examined the expression of the three TACC , chTOG and Aurora A in breast cancer using immunohistochemistry on tissue microarrays .
We show that expressions of TACC1 , TACC2 , TACC3 and Aurora A are significantly correlated and downregulated in a subset of breast tumors .
Using siRNAs , we further show that depletion of chTOG and , to a lesser extent of TACC1 , perturbates cell division .
We propose that TACC proteins , which we also named ` Taxins ' , control mRNA translation and cell division in conjunction with microtubule organization and in association with chTOG and Aurora A , and that these complexes and cell processes may be affected during mammary gland oncogenesis .
CIR, a corepressor linking the DNA binding factor CBF1 to the histone deacetylase complex.
CBF1 is a member of the CSL family of DNA binding factors , which mediate either transcriptional repression or transcriptional activation .
CSL proteins play a central role in Notch signaling and in Epstein-Barr virus-induced immortalization .
Notch is a transmembrane protein involved in cell-fate decisions , and the cytoplasmic domain of Notch ( NotchIC ) targets CBF1 .
The Epstein-Barr virus-immortalizing protein EBNA2 activates both cellular and viral gene expression by targeting CBF1 and mimicking NotchIC .
We have examined the mechanism of CBF1-mediated repression and show that CBF1 binds to a unique corepressor , CBF1 interacting corepressor ( CIR ) .
A CIR homolog is encoded by Caenorhabditis elegans , indicating that CIR is evolutionarily conserved .
Two CBF1 mutants that were unable to bind CIR did not function as repressors , suggesting that targeting of CIR to CBF1 is an important component of repression .
When expressed as a Gal4 fusion protein , CIR repressed reporter gene expression .
CIR binds to histone deacetylase and to SAP30 and serves as a linker between CBF1 and the histone deacetylase complex .
The human tuftelin gene and the expression of tuftelin in mineralizing and nonmineralizing tissues.
Tuftelin has been suggested to play an important role during the development and mineralization of enamel , but its precise function is still unclear .
This article reviews major milestones in the discovery , structural characterization , expression , localization , and conservation of tuftelin in different vertebrate species .
It focuses on the structure of the human tuftelin gene , which has recently been deciphered ( 12 ) .
It describes the exon-intron organization , sizes and structure , the promoter structure , and the newly discovered alternatively spliced human tooth-bud tuftelin mRNA transcripts .
It also examines information on the structural motifs in the human-derived tuftelin protein and how they relate to tuftelin from other species .
It reviews our recent results on the transcription of tuftelin mRNA and protein expression in several nonmineralizing soft tissues , using reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction ( RT-PCR ) followed by DNA cloning and sequencing , indirect immunohistochemistry , immunohistochemistry combined with confocal microscopy , and in situ hybridization .
These results and earlier Northern blot results show that tuftelin , in addition to being expressed in the developing and mineralizing tooth , is also expressed in several nonmineralizing soft tissues , suggesting that tuftelin has a universal function and\/or a multifunctional role .
Human RanBP3, a group of nuclear RanGTP binding proteins.
A group of novel human Ran-binding proteins , RanBP3 , was identified using the yeast two-hybrid system via Ran-mediated interaction with the nucleotide exchange factor RCC1 .
Several open reading frames , representing putative alternatively spliced products , were established by cDNA cloning .
Two of them , RanBP3-a and RanBP3-b , encode nuclear hydrophilic proteins of 499 and 562 amino acid residues .
The sequences contain FXFG motifs , characteristic of a subgroup of nucleoporins , and a C-terminal domain showing similarity to the Ran-binding protein RanBP1 .
These proteins are localized in the nucleus , preferentially bind RanGTP and may be nuclear effectors of the Ran pathway .
CHMP1 functions as a member of a newly defined family of vesicle trafficking proteins.
A multivesicular body is a vesicle-filled endosome that targets proteins to the interior of lysosomes .
We have identified a conserved eukaryotic protein , human CHMP1 , which is strongly implicated in multivesicular body formation .
Immunocytochemistry and biochemical fractionation localize CHMP1 to early endosomes and CHMP1 physically interacts with SKD1\/VPS4 , a highly conserved protein directly linked to multivesicular body sorting in yeast .
Similar to the action of a mutant SKD1 protein , overexpression of a fusion derivative of human CHMP1 dilates endosomal compartments and disrupts the normal distribution of several endosomal markers .
Genetic studies in Saccharomyces cerevisiae further support a conserved role of CHMP1 in vesicle trafficking .
Deletion of CHM1 , the budding yeast homolog of CHMP1 , results in defective sorting of carboxypeptidases S and Y and produces abnormal , multi-lamellar prevacuolar compartments .
This phenotype classifies CHM1 as a member of the class E vacuolar protein sorting genes .
Yeast Chm1p belongs to a structurally-related , but rather divergent family of proteins , including Vps24p and Snf7p and three novel proteins , Chm2p , Chm5p and Chm6p , which are all essential for multivesicular body sorting .
These observations identify the conserved CHMP\/Chmp family as a set of proteins fundamental to understanding multivesicular body sorting in eukaryotic organisms .
Characterization of the structure and regulation of two novel isoforms of serum- and glucocorticoid-induced protein kinase.
The catalytic domain of serum - and glucocorticoid-induced protein kinase ( SGK ) is 54 % identical with protein kinase B ( PKB ) and , like PKB , is activated in vitro by 3-phosphoinositide-dependent protein kinase-1 ( PDK1 ) and in vivo in response to signals that activate phosphatidylinositol ( PI ) 3-kinase .
Here we identify two novel isoforms of SGK , termed SGK2 and SGK3 , whose catalytic domains share 80 % amino acid sequence identity with each other and with SGK ( renamed SGK1 ) .
Like SGK1 , the mRNA encoding SGK3 is expressed in all tissues examined , but SGK2 mRNA is only present at significant levels in liver , kidney and pancreas and , at lower levels , in the brain .
The levels of SGK2 mRNA in H4IIE cells and SGK3 mRNA in Rat2 fibroblasts are not increased by stimulation with serum or dexamethasone , whereas the level of SGK1 mRNA is increased greatly .
SGK2 and SGK3 are activated in vitro by PDK1 , albeit more slowly than SGK1 , and their activation is accompanied by the phosphorylation of Thr ( 193 ) and Thr ( 253 ) respectively , the residues equivalent to the Thr in the ` activation loop ' of PKB that is targeted by PDK1 .
The PDK1-catalysed phosphorylation and activation of SGK2 and SGK3 , like SGK1 , is greatly potentiated by mutating Ser ( 356 ) and Ser ( 419 ) respectively to Asp , these residues being equivalent to the C-terminal phosphorylation site of PKB .
Like SGK1 , SGK2 and SGK3 are activated 5-fold via a phosphorylation mechanism when cells are exposed to H ( 2 ) O ( 2 ) but , in contrast with SGK1 , activation is only suppressed partially by inhibitors of PI 3-kinase .
SGK2 and SGK3 are activated to a smaller extent by insulin-like growth factor-1 ( 2-fold ) than SGK1 ( 5-fold ) .
Like PKB and SGK1 , SGK2 and SGK3 preferentially phosphorylate Ser and Thr residues that lie in Arg-Xaa-Arg-Xaa-Xaa-Ser \/ Thr motifs .
JEM-1, a novel gene encoding a leucine-zipper nuclear factor upregulated during retinoid-induced maturation of NB4 promyelocytic leukaemia.
Retinoid-induced proliferation causing hyperleukocytosis is a severe complication of retinoid therapy in t ( 15 ; 17 ) acute promyelocytic leukemia .
The molecular basis of this phenomenon is unknown .
It is possible that the transiently enhanced cell proliferation results from RA-induction of growth regulatory genes .
Using Differential Display of cDNAs from NB4 cells we have identified Jem , a novel gene transcript which is upregulated by retinoids during the early proliferative response in maturating cells but not in resistant cells .
A 2.7 kb cDNA was cloned and sequenced .
The open reading frame contains a 400 amino acid sequence corresponding to a novel 45 kDa basic protein ( pI 8.9 ) .
The JEM DNA sequence is detected by FISH on human chromosome 1 at q24 .
The Jem peptide sequence shows a ` leucine-zipper ' dimerisation motif with limited homology to Fos\/Jun and ATF\/CREB proteins and several putative phosphorylation sites .
An atypical basic region may correspond to an unknown DNA-binding domain .
The C-terminal end of Jem spans a long stretch featuring a PEST motif .
After transfection into COS cells , the Jem protein shows a ponctuated nuclear localisation .
We hypothesise that this novel nuclear factor may act as a transcription factor , or a coregulator , involved in either cell growth control and\/or maturation .
A novel mammalian iron-regulated protein involved in intracellular iron metabolism.
We have isolated and characterized a novel iron-regulated gene that is homologous to the divalent metal transporter 1 family of metal transporters .
This gene , termed metal transporter protein ( mtp1 ) , is expressed in tissues involved in body iron homeostasis including the developing and mature reticuloendothelial system , the duodenum , and the pregnant uterus .
MTP1 is also expressed in muscle and central nervous system cells in the embryo .
At the subcellular level , MTP1 is localized to the basolateral membrane of the duodenal epithelial cell and a cytoplasmic compartment of reticuloendothelial system cells .
Overexpression of MTP1 in tissue culture cells results in intracellular iron depletion .
In the adult mouse , MTP1 expression in the liver and duodenum are reciprocally regulated .
Iron deficiency induces MTP1 expression in the duodenum but down-regulates expression in the liver .
These data indicate that MTP1 is an iron-regulated membrane-spanning protein that is involved in intracellular iron metabolism .
Robo1 and Robo2 are homophilic binding molecules that promote axonal growth.
In the present study we show that following transfection in 3T3 cells , human Robo1 and Robo2 stimulate neurite outgrowth from Robo-positive neurons ( retinal neurons and olfactory neurons ) , but have no effect on Robo-negative neurons ( cerebellar granule cells ) .
The neurite outgrowth response was inhibited by an antibody raised against the first Ig domain of Robo1\/2 or by soluble Robo-Fc chimera .
Furthermore , we show that the extracellular domains of Robo1 and Robo2 are homophilic adhesion molecules that can also interact with each other .
These data suggest a wider range of functions for the Robo family in the development of the nervous system and provide novel insights into the molecular basis for the phenotypes observed in Robo mutants in Drosophila , C. elegans , and zebrafish .
Coding sequence and expression patterns of mouse chordin and mapping of the cognate mouse chrd and human CHRD genes.
Chordin is a key developmental protein that dorsalizes early vertebrate embryonic tissues by binding to ventralizing TGF-beta-like bone morphogenetic proteins and sequestering them in latent complexes .
Here we report the first characterization of mammalian chordin .
The full-length cDNA sequence for mouse chordin is given , and RNA blot analysis shows the murine chordin gene Chrd to be expressed at relatively high levels in 7-day postcoitum mouse embryos and at much decreased levels at later developmental times and in adult tissues .
These results imply a major role for chordin during gastrulation of the mammalian embryo .
Nevertheless , both murine and human chordin genes are shown to be expressed at readily detectable levels in several fetal and adult tissues , most notably liver and cerebellum , suggesting additional roles in organogenesis and homeostasis .
Chrd was mapped to mouse chromosome 16 using interspecific crosses , and the cognate human gene CHRD was localized to human chromosome 3q27 by radiation hybrid mapping .
Identification of mammalian Sds3 as an integral component of the Sin3/histone deacetylase corepressor complex.
Silencing of gene transcription involves local chromatin modification achieved through the local recruitment of large multiprotein complexes containing histone deacetylase ( HDAC ) activity .
The mammalian corepressors mSin3A and mSin3B have been shown to play a key role in this process by tethering HDACs 1 and 2 to promoter-bound transcription factors .
Similar mechanisms appear to be operative in yeast , in which epistasis experiments have established that the mSin3 and HDAC orthologs ( SIN3 and RPD3 ) , along with a novel protein , SDS3 , function in the same repressor pathway .
Here , we report the identification of a component of the mSin3-HDAC complex that bears homology to yeast SDS3 , physically associates with mSin3 proteins in vivo , represses transcription in a manner that is partially dependent on HDAC activity , and enables HDAC1 catalytic activity in vivo .
That key physical and functional properties are also shared by yeast SDS3 underscores the central role of the Sin3-HDAC-Sds3 complex in eukaryotic cell biology , and the discovery of mSds3 in mammalian cells provides a new avenue for modulating the activity of this complex in human disease .
Identification of a fourth subunit of mammalian DNA polymerase delta.
A 12-kDa and two 25-kDa polypeptides were isolated with highly purified calf thymus DNA polymerase delta by conventional chromatography .
A 16-mer peptide sequence was obtained from the 12-kDa polypeptide which matched a new open reading frame from a human EST ( ) encoding a hypothetical protein of unknown function .
The protein was designated as p12 .
Human EST was identified as the putative human homolog of Schizosaccharomyces pombe Cdm1 by a tBlastn search of the EST data base using S. pombe Cdm1 .
The open reading frame of human EST encoded a polypeptide of 107 amino acids with a predicted molecular mass of 12.4 kDa , consistent with the experimental findings .
p12 is 25 % identical to S pombe Cdm1 .
Both of the 25-kDa polypeptide sequences matched the hypothetical KIAA0039 protein sequence , recently identified as the third subunit of pol delta .
Western blotting of immunoaffinity purified calf thymus pol delta revealed the presence of p125 , p50 , p68 ( the KIAA0039 product ) , and p12 .
With the identification of p12 mammalian pol delta can now be shown to consist of four subunits .
These studies pave the way for more detailed analysis of the possible functions of the mammalian subunits of pol delta .
The cytoplasmic zinc finger protein ZPR1 accumulates in the nucleolus of proliferating cells.
The zinc finger protein ZPR1 translocates from the cytoplasm to the nucleus after treatment of cells with mitogens .
The function of nuclear ZPR1 has not been defined .
Here we demonstrate that ZPR1 accumulates in the nucleolus of proliferating cells .
The role of ZPR1 was examined using a gene disruption strategy .
Cells lacking ZPR1 are not viable .
Biochemical analysis demonstrated that the loss of ZPR1 caused disruption of nucleolar function , including preribosomal RNA expression .
These data establish ZPR1 as an essential protein that is required for normal nucleolar function in proliferating cells .
Isolation of a genomic clone containing the promoter region of the human ATP binding cassette (ABC) transporter, ABCB6.
We previously reported on the isolation of a new rat ATP binding cassette ( ABC ) transporter , ABCB6 .
We now report the isolation of the full-length cDNA and genomic clones containing the human ABCB6 gene .
ABCB6 is 100 % identical to the cloned MTABC3 human ABC transporter and contains the typical ABC signature , Walker A and B motifs .
We found that HuABCB6 is expressed at low levels in normal human liver .
We found that ABCB6 was overexpressed in human hepatocellular carcinomas compared to paired surrounding non-malignant tissue .
We found that there was no difference in ABCB6 gene copy between human liver cancer and its paired non-malignant tissue .
Because HuABCB6 was overexpressed in human cancers compared to peri-tumoral tissue in the absence of gene amplification , transcriptional regulation may play an important role in its expression .
Therefore , we isolated a 14 kb genomic DNA clone containing the HuABCB6 promoter and 5 ' - flanking region .
The 5 ' - flanking region contains a CpG island , lacks an appropriately positioned TATA element and contains a number of putative transcription factor binding sites .
Two transcription start sites were identified by S1 nuclease mapping at -274 and -296 bp from the start codon .
Transient transfection of the HuABCB6 promoter constructs ( HuABCB6\/1 .68 , 1.39 , 1.13 , 0.90 , 0.52 ) containing the luciferase reporter gene resulted in a 1100-2300-fold increase in luciferase activity compared to the empty vector control whereas HuABCB6\/1 .68 subcloned in the reverse orientation resulted in no activity .
We observed a significant decrease in luciferase activity with the promoter constructs , HuABCB6\/0 .25 , 0.15 and 0.06 , which indicates that an orientation-dependent functional promoter is contained within our previously predicted promoter region of -315 bp to -565 bp as deletion of this 250 bp sequence resulted in a loss of promoter activity .
Metaxin 1 interacts with metaxin 2, a novel related protein associated with the mammalian mitochondrial outer membrane.
A recently described protein , metaxin 1 , serves as a component of a preprotein import complex in the outer membrane of the mammalian mitochondrion .
A yeast two-hybrid screen with metaxin 1 as bait has now identified a novel protein , which we have termed metaxin 2 , as a metaxin 1-binding protein .
Metaxin 2 shares 29 % identity with metaxin 1 at the amino acid level , but metaxin 2 , unlike metaxin 1 , lacks a C-terminal mitochondrial outer membrane signal-anchor domain .
Two C. elegans hypothetical proteins , CelZC97 .1 and CelF39B2 .
i , share high sequence similarity with metaxin 2 and metaxin 1 , respectively , and likely represent the C. elegans orthologs .
Affinity-purified antibodies against metaxin 2 were prepared against the recombinant protein produced in E. coli and were used to analyze the subcellular distribution of metaxin 2 .
In subcellular fractions of mouse liver , a 29 kD immunoreactive protein , consistent in size with the predicted translation product of metaxin 2 cDNA , was found solely in mitochondria .
Alkali extraction of mitochondria indicated that metaxin 2 is peripherally associated with mitochondrial membranes .
Metaxin 2 in intact mitochondria was susceptible to digestion with proteinase K , indicating that metaxin 2 is located on the cytosolic face of the mitochondrial outer membrane .
Finally , baculoviruses encoding a His6-tagged metaxin 2 and an untagged metaxin 1 lacking its C-terminal transmembrane domain were produced and used separately or in combination to infect Sf21 insect cells .
Metaxin 1 bound to a Ni2 + - chelate affinity column only in the presence of metaxin 2 , indicating that metaxin 1 and metaxin 2 interact when overexpressed in insect cells .
These results suggest that metaxin 2 is bound to the cytosolic face of the mitochondrial outer membrane by means of its interaction with membrane-bound metaxin 1 , and that this complex may play a role in protein import into mammalian mitochondria .
Induction of apoptosis by X-linked ectodermal dysplasia receptor via a caspase 8-dependent mechanism.
X-linked ectodermal dysplasia receptor ( XEDAR ) is a recently isolated member of the tumor necrosis factor receptor family that is highly expressed during embryonic development and binds to ectodysplasin-A2 ( EDA-A2 ) .
In this report , we demonstrate that although XEDAR lacks a death domain , it nevertheless induces apoptosis in an EDA-A2-dependent fashion .
The apoptosis-inducing ability of XEDAR is dependent on the activation of caspase 8 and can be blocked by its genetic and pharmacological inhibitors .
Although XEDAR-induced apoptosis can be blocked by dominant-negative Fas-associated death domain ( FADD ) protein and FADD small interfering RNA , XEDAR does not directly bind to FADD , tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated death domain ( TRADD ) protein , or RIP1 .
Instead , XEDAR signaling leads to the formation of a secondary complex containing FADD , caspase 8 , and caspase 10 , which results in caspase activation .
Thus , XEDAR belongs to a novel class of death receptors that lack a discernible death domain but are capable of activating apoptosis in a caspase 8 - and FADD-dependent fashion .
XEDAR may represent an early stage in the evolution of death receptors prior to the emergence of the death domain and may play a role in the induction of apoptosis during embryonic development and adult life .
Activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID) deficiency causes the autosomal recessive form of the Hyper-IgM syndrome (HIGM2).
The activation-induced cytidine deaminase ( AID ) gene , specifically expressed in germinal center B cells in mice , is a member of the cytidine deaminase family .
We herein report mutations in the human counterpart of AID in patients with the autosomal recessive form of hyper-IgM syndrome ( HIGM2 ) .
Three major abnormalities characterize AID deficiency : ( 1 ) the absence of immunoglobulin class switch recombination , ( 2 ) the lack of immunoglobulin somatic hypermutations , and ( 3 ) lymph node hyperplasia caused by the presence of giant germinal centers .
The phenotype observed in HIGM2 patients ( and in AID - \/ - mice ) demonstrates the absolute requirement for AID in several crucial steps of B cell terminal differentiation necessary for efficient antibody responses .
Large exons encoding multiple ectodomains are a characteristic feature of protocadherin genes.
Recent studies revealed a striking difference in the genomic organization of classic cadherin genes and one family of '' nonclassic cadherin '' genes designated protocadherins .
Specifically , the DNA sequences encoding the ectodomain repeats of classic cadherins are interrupted by multiple introns .
By contrast , all of the encoded ectodomains of each member of the protocadherin gene clusters are present in one large exon .
To determine whether large ectodomain exons are a general feature of protocadherin genes we have investigated the genomic organization of several additional human protocadherin genes by using DNA sequence information in GenBank .
These genes include protocadherin 12 ( Pcdh12 ) , an ortholog of the mouse vascular endothelial cadherin-2 gene ; hFmi1 and hFmi2 , homologs of the Drosophila planar cell polarity gene , flamingo ; hFat2 , a homolog of the Drosophila tumor suppressor gene fat ; and the Drosophila DN-cadherin and DE-cadherin genes .
Each of these genes was found to be a member of the protocadherin subfamily , based on amino acid sequence comparisons of their ectodomains .
Remarkably , all of these protocadherin genes share a common feature : most of the genomic DNA sequences encoding their ectodomains are not interrupted by an intron .
We conclude that the presence of unusually large exons is a characteristic feature of protocadherin genes .
Cloning and functional expression of the human GlcNAc-1-P transferase, the enzyme for the committed step of the dolichol cycle, by heterologous complementation in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
The gene for the human dolichol cycle GlcNAc-1-P transferase ( ALG7\/GPT ) was cloned by screening a human lung fibroblast cDNA library .
The library was constructed in a Saccharomyces cerevisiae expression vector , and the positive clone was identified by complementation of the conditional lethal S. cerevisiae strain YPH-A7-GAL .
This strain was constructed by replacing the endogenous promoter of the GPT-gene by the stringently regulated GAL1-promoter .
This construct allows to specifically suppress the endogenous enzyme activity .
The insert of the positive clone displayed an open reading frame of 1200 nucleotides , coding for a putative protein of 400 amino acids with a calculated molecular weight of 44.7 kDa .
The deduced protein sequence shows a homology of over 90 % when compared with other mammalian GPT sequences , thus resembling the close phylogenetic relationship between mammalian species .
This homology however decreases to 40-50 % when compared to more distantly related organisms such as S. cerevisiae , Schizosaccharomyces pombe , or Leishmania amazonensis .
Biochemical characterization of the recombinant protein showed that it is functionally expressed in the S. cerevisiae strain YPH-A7-GAL .
GlcNAc - and GlcNAc2-PP-Dolichol biosynthesis could be shown with isolated S. cerevisiae membranes from cells harboring the recombinant plasmid and grown on glucose thus suppressing transcription of the endogenous gene .
Synthesis could be stimulated by dolicholphosphate and was inhibited by tunicamycin .
These results show that we have cloned the human GlcNAc-1-P transferase by heterologous complementation in S. cerevisiae , a strategy that may be useful for the cloning and characterization of glycosyltransferases from a variety of organisms .
Physical and functional interactions between Daxx and TSG101.
Daxx has been reported to mediate the Fas\/JNK-dependent signals in the cytoplasm .
However , several evidences have suggested that Daxx is located mainly in the nucleus and functions as a transcriptional regulator .
Recently , we identified DMAP1 , a TSG101-interacting protein as a Daxx binding partner by yeast two-hybrid screening .
TSG101 has been shown to act as transcriptional co-repressor of nuclear hormone receptors .
Here we examined whether TSG101also interacts with Daxx directly .
The association of Daxx and TSG101 was confirmed using co-expressed tagged proteins .
The interaction regions in both proteins were also mapped , and the cellular localization of the interaction was examined .
TSG101 formed a complex with Daxx through its coiled-coil domain and co-localized in the nucleus .
Furthermore , TSG101 enhanced Daxx-mediated repression of glucocorticoid receptor transcriptional activity .
These results provide the novel molecular interactions between Daxx and TSG101 , which establish an efficient repressive transcription complex in the nucleus .
Localization and genomic organization of a new hepatocellular organic anion transporting polypeptide.
Based on sequence homology to the human organic anion transporting polypeptide 2 ( OATP2 ; SLC21A6 ) , we cloned a new member of the SLC21A superfamily of solute carriers , termed OATP8 ( SLC21A8 ) .
The protein of 702 amino acids showed an amino acid identity of 80 % with human OATP2 .
Based on Northern blotting , the expression of OATP8 was restricted to human liver .
Cosmid clones containing the genes encoding human OATP1 ( SLC21A3 ) , OATP2 ( SLC21A6 ) , and OATP8 ( SLC21A8 ) served to establish their genomic organization .
All three genes contained 14 exons with 13 identical splice sites when transferred to the amino acid sequence .
An antibody raised against the carboxyl terminus localized OATP8 to the basolateral membrane of human hepatocytes and the recombinant glycoprotein , expressed in MDCKII cells , to the lateral membrane .
Transport properties of OATP8 were studied in stably transfected MDCKII and HEK293 cells .
Organic anions transported by human OATP8 included sulfobromophthalein , with a K ( m ) of 3.3 microm , and 17beta-glucuronosyl estradiol , with a K ( m ) of 5.4 microm .
Several bile salts were not substrates .
Thus , human OATP8 is a new uptake transporter in the basolateral hepatocyte membrane with an overlapping but distinct substrate specificity as compared with OATP2 , which is localized to the same membrane domain .
Molecular cloning, chromosome mapping and characterization of UBQLN3 a testis-specific gene that contains an ubiquitin-like domain.
The sequence of the ubiquitin protein is highly conserved between species and has facilitated the cloning of numerous ubiquitin-like proteins .
In the present study , we report the cloning of the cDNA for human ubiquilin 3 ( UBQLN3 ) .
The deduced amino acid sequence of UBQLN3 contains a UBQ domain ( ubiquitin-like ) in the amino terminus as well as two highly conserved domains found in several recently cloned ubiquitin-like proteins .
One of these domains , termed the NP domain , is a highly conserved 93 amino acid region present in UBQLN3 and several ubiquitin-like proteins .
The last conserved domain is the UBA domain ( ubiquitin-associated ) found in a variety of proteins of the ubiquination pathway .
The human UBQLN3 gene was mapped to the 11p15 region of chromosome 11 .
Northern blot analysis of multiple human and mouse tissues demonstrated UBQLN3 mRNA expression specifically in testis .
Isolation and characterization of the novel popeye gene family expressed in skeletal muscle and heart.
We identified a novel gene family in vertebrates which is preferentially expressed in developing and adult striated muscle .
Three genes of the Popeye ( POP ) family were detected in human and mouse and two in chicken .
Chromosomal mapping indicates that Pop1 and Pop3 genes are clustered on mouse chromosome 10 , whereas Pop2 maps to mouse chromosome 16 .
We found evidence that POP1 and POP3 in chicken may also be linked and multiple transcript isoforms are generated from this locus .
The POP genes encode proteins with three potential transmembrane domains that are conserved in all family members .
Individual POP genes exhibit specific expression patterns during development and postnatally .
Chicken POP3 and mouse Pop1 are first preferentially expressed in atrium and later also in the subepicardial compact layer of the ventricles .
Chicken POP1 and mouse Pop2 are expressed in the entire heart except the outflow tract .
All three Pop genes are expressed in heart and skeletal muscle of the adult mouse and lower in lung .
Pop1 and Pop2 expression is upregulated in uterus of pregnant mice .
Like the mouse genes , human POP genes are predominantly expressed in skeletal and cardiac muscle .
The strong conservation of POP genes during evolution and their preferential expression in heart and skeletal muscle suggest that these novel proteins may have an important function in these tissues in vertebrates .
SM-20 is a novel 40-kd protein whose expression in the arterial wall is restricted to smooth muscle.
We have previously reported the identification of a novel cDNA , SM-20 , whose corresponding mRNA levels are regulated by growth factors in rat aortic smooth muscle cell ( SMC ) culture .
Affinity-purified polyclonal and monoclonal antibodies were made against a 230 amino acid region of the SM-20 putative peptide expressed in the bacterial vector , pET-3b .
Western blot analyses of rat and human SMC lysates detected a single protein species of approximately 40 kd .
SM-20 was not detected in concentrates of the culture medium .
By immunohistochemistry , SM-20 was localized to filaments in the cytoplasm of cultured SMC .
Like SM-20 mRNA , levels of SM-20 protein were increased 1-3 hours after serum stimulation of rat aortic SMC .
In rat tissues , SM-20 antigen was detected in abundance in smooth , cardiac , and skeletal muscle .
SM-20 was also detected in some epithelial cells of the kidney , pancreas , gastrointestinal tract , and skin , but was not found in the parenchyma of the liver , spleen , or testis .
In the rat arterial wall , SM-20 antigen was restricted to the SMC of the media and , after balloon arterial injury , was found most abundantly in the neointima .
In human atherosclerotic coronary arteries , SM-20 antigen predominated in the SMC of the intimal plaques and was not detected in macrophages , endothelium , or adventitial cells .
Thus , SM-20 encodes a protein which serves as a novel SMC-specific marker within the vessel wall .
Two closely related human nuclear export factors utilize entirely distinct export pathways.
Nuclear mRNA export mediated by the human protein TAP requires a carboxy-terminal domain that directly interacts with components of the nuclear pore complex .
Here we demonstrate that NXF3 , a human RNA binding protein related to TAP , lacks this domain yet retains the ability to export tethered RNA transcripts and to shuttle between the nucleus and the cytoplasm .
NXF3 contains a novel Crm1-dependent nuclear export signal that compensates in cis for the loss of the nuclear pore targeting domain .
NXF3-dependent RNA export is therefore blocked by Crm1-specific inhibitors that do not affect TAP function .
Thus , while the related TAP and NXF3 proteins are both capable of mediating nuclear RNA export , they do so via unrelated export pathways .
Identification of two novel transmembrane gamma-carboxyglutamic acid proteins expressed broadly in fetal and adult tissues.
The proline-rich gamma-carboxyglutamic acid ( Gla ) proteins ( PRGPs ) 1 and 2 are the founding members of a family of vitamin K-dependent single-pass integral membrane proteins characterized by an extracellular amino terminal domain of approximately 45 amino acids that is rich in Gla .
The intracellular carboxyl terminal region of these two proteins contains one or two copies of the sequence PPXY , a motif present in a variety of proteins involved in such diverse cellular functions as signal transduction , cell cycle progression , and protein turnover .
In this report , we describe the cloning of the cDNAs for two additional human transmembrane Gla proteins ( TMG ) of 20-24 kDa named TMG3 and TMG4 .
These two proteins possess extracellular Gla domains with 13 or 9 potential Gla residues , respectively , followed by membrane-spanning hydrophobic regions and cytoplasmic carboxyl terminal regions that contain PPXY motifs .
This emerging family of integral membrane Gla proteins includes proline-rich Gla protein ( PRGP ) 1 , PRGP2 , TMG3 , and TMG4 , all of which are characterized by broad and variable distribution in both fetal and adult tissues .
Members of this family can be grouped into two subclasses on the basis of their gene organization and amino acid sequence .
These observations suggest novel physiological functions for vitamin K beyond its known role in the biosynthesis of proteins involved in blood coagulation and bone development .
The identification and characterization of these proteins may allow a more complete understanding of the teratogenic consequences of exposure in utero to vitamin K antagonists , such as warfarin-based anticoagulants .
SMARCAD1, a novel human helicase family-defining member associated with genetic instability: cloning, expression, and mapping to 4q22-q23, a band rich in breakpoints and deletion mutants involved in several human diseases.
Members of the DEAD\/H box-containing helicase superfamily include proteins essential to genome replication , repair , and expression .
We report here the cloning and initial characterization of a novel human member of this protein family , designated hHel1 ( human helicase 1 ) , now designated SMARCAD1 by HUGO .
This DEAD\/H box-containing molecule has seven highly conserved sequence regions that allow us to place it in the SNF2 family of the helicase superfamily .
Uniquely , though , hHel1 contains two DEAD\/H box motifs , a property not reported to be shared by any other SNF2 family members .
This defines a new subfamily consisting of hHel1 and its homologs .
In addition to these DEAD\/H box\/ATP-binding motifs , hHel1 has a putative nuclear localization signal and several regions that may mediate protein-protein interactions .
Expression analysis indicates that hHel1 transcripts are ubiquitous , with particularly high levels in endocrine tissue .
We have mapped the gene for hHel1 to human chromosome 4q22-q23 ; this region is rich in breakpoints and deletion mutants of genes involved in several human diseases , notably soft tissue leiomyosarcoma , hepatocellular carcinoma , and hematologic malignancies .
Our observation that human Hel1 gene overexpression is present in an E1A-expressing cell line with increased capacity for gene reactivation events by genomic rearrangement suggests that human Hel1 may play a role in genetic instability development .
Large-scale identification and characterization of human genes that activate NF-kappaB and MAPK signaling pathways.
We have carried out a large-scale identification and characterization of human genes that activate the NF-kappaB and MARK signaling pathways .
We constructed full-length cDNA libraries using the oligo-capping method and prepared an arrayed cDNA pool consisting of 150 000 cDNAs randomly isolated from the libraries .
For analysis of the NF-kappaB signaling pathway , we introduced each of the cDNAs into human embryonic kidney 293 cells and examined whether it activated the transcription of a luciferase reporter gene driven by a promoter containing the consensus NF-kappaB binding sites .
In total , we identified 299 cDNAs that activate the NF-kappaB pathway , and we classified them into 83 genes , including 30 characterized activator genes of the NF-kappaB pathway , 28 genes whose involvement in the NF-kappaB pathways have not been characterized and 25 novel genes .
We then carried out a similar analysis for the identification of genes that activate the MARK pathway , utilizing the same cDNA resource .
We assayed 145 000 cDNAs and identified 57 genes that activate the MARK pathway .
Interestingly , 27 genes were overlapping between the NF-kappaB and the MAPK pathways , which may indicate that these genes play cross-talking roles between these two pathways .
Human mitochondrial function during cardiac growth and development.
Little information is presently available concerning mitochondrial respiratory and oxidative phosphorylation function in the normal human heart during growth and development .
We investigated the levels of specific mitochondrial enzyme activities and content during cardiac growth and development from the early neonatal period ( 10-20 days ) to adulthood ( 67 years ) .
Biochemical analysis of enzyme specific activities and content and mitochondrial DNA ( mtDNA ) copy number was performed with left ventricular tissues derived from 30 control individuals .
The levels of cytochrome c oxidase ( COX ) and complex V specific activity , mtDNA copy number and COX subunit II content remained unchanged in contrast to increased citrate synthase ( CS ) activity and content .
The developmental increase in CS activity paralleled increasing CS polypeptide content , but was neither related to overall increases in mitochondrial number nor coordinately regulated with mitochondrial respiratory enzyme activities .
Our findings of unchanged levels of cardiac mitochondrial respiratory enzyme activity during the progression from early childhood to older adult contrasts with the age-specific regulation found with CS , a Krebs cycle mitochondrial enzyme .
DNMT1 binds HDAC2 and a new co-repressor, DMAP1, to form a complex at replication foci.
DNA methylation can contribute to transcriptional silencing through several transcriptionally repressive complexes , which include methyl-CpG binding domain proteins ( MBDs ) and histone deacetylases ( HDACs ) .
We show here that the chief enzyme that maintains mammalian DNA methylation , DNMT1 , can also establish a repressive transcription complex .
The non-catalytic amino terminus of DNMT1 binds to HDAC2 and a new protein , DMAP1 ( for DNMT1 associated protein ) , and can mediate transcriptional repression .
DMAP1 has intrinsic transcription repressive activity , and binds to the transcriptional co-repressor TSG101 .
DMAP1 is targeted to replication foci through interaction with the far N terminus of DNMT1 throughout S phase , whereas HDAC2 joins DNMT1 and DMAP1 only during late S phase , providing a platform for how histones may become deacetylated in heterochromatin following replication .
Thus , DNMT1 not only maintains DNA methylation , but also may directly target , in a heritable manner , transcriptionally repressive chromatin to the genome during DNA replication .
Isolation and characterization of a new nucleolar protein, Nrap, that is conserved from yeast to humans.
BACKGROUND : The nucleolus is the site of rRNA synthesis and processing in eukaryotic cells , but its composition remains poorly understood .
RESULTS : We have identified a novel nucleolar RNA-associated protein ( Nrap ) which is highly conserved from yeast ( Saccharomyces cerevisiae ) to human , with homologs in mouse , Drosophila melanogaster , Caenorhabditis elegans , Arabidopsis thaliana , Schizosaccharomyces pombe , and other species .
In the mouse , we have found that Nrap is ubiquitously expressed and is specifically localized in the nucleolus .
We have also identified splice variants in human and mouse , and defined the intron-exon structure of the human Nrap gene .
Nrap is inherited into daughter nuclei by associating with the condensed chromosomes during mitosis .
RNase treatment of permeabilized cells indicated that the nucleolar localization of Nrap is RNA dependent .
The effects of actinomycin D , cycloheximide and 5,6-dichloro-beta-d-ribofuranosyl-benzimidazole on Nrap expression and distribution in cultured cells suggest that Nrap is associated with the pre-rRNA transcript .
CONCLUSIONS : Nrap is a large nucleolar protein ( of more than 1000 amino acids ) , and is a new class of protein with new structural and functional motifs .
Nrap appears to be associated with ribosome biogenesis by interacting with pre-rRNA primary transcript .
Identification of two novel human dynein light chain genes, DNLC2A and DNLC2B, and their expression changes in hepatocellular carcinoma tissues from 68 Chinese patients.
Two full-length cDNAs , DNLC2A and DNLC2B , were cloned and characterized .
Their open reading frames respectively encode 96 amino acids which are most closely homologous to roadblock\/LC7 , one member of an ancient dynein light chain protein family , conserved in nematode , fruit fly , mouse and rat .
The DNLC2A was expressed in 12 of 16 human tissues examined , with especially strong expression in heart , liver and brain , whereas there was weak expression in lung , prostate , testis , small intestine and colon .
The expression of DNLC2B was generally high compared with that of DNLC2A except in liver .
Northern blotting and\/or semi-quantitative RT-PCR analysis examined the expression changes of DNLC2A and DNLC2B in 68 hepatocellular carcinoma tissue samples .
It was revealed that DNLC2A was up-regulated ( 45 out of the 68 cases ) while DNLC2B was down-regulated ( 44 out of 68 cases ) , compared with their adjacent tumor-free liver tissues .
Interestingly , among the total 68 liver cancer samples tested , DNLC2A was up-regulated while DNLC2B was down-regulated in 28 cases ; DNLC2A was up-regulated while no obvious change was observed for DNLC2B in 10 cases ; no obvious change was observed for DNLC2A while DNLC2B was down-regulated in 14 cases .
Although the underlying mechanism is not clear to date , the apparent up-regulation of DNLC2A and down-regulation of DNLC2B suggest that these genes might be involved in tumor progression .
On the other hand , the different expression changes of the two homologous genes indicate that hepatocellular carcinomas are caused by different pathological mechanisms .
In addition , DNLC2A was assigned to human chromosome 20q12-q13 .11 near the marker D20S106 by radiation hybrid mapping .
Identification of the mitochondrial glutamate transporter. Bacterial expression, reconstitution, functional characterization, and tissue distribution of two human isoforms.
The mitochondrial carriers are a family of transport proteins in the inner membranes of mitochondria .
They shuttle substrates , metabolites , and cofactors through this membrane and connect cytoplasm functions with others in the matrix .
Glutamate is co-transported with H ( + ) ( or exchanged for OH ( - ) ) , but no protein has ever been associated with this activity .
Two human expressed sequence tags encode proteins of 323 and 315 amino acids with 63 % identity that are related to the aspartate-glutamate carrier , a member of the carrier family .
They have been overexpressed in Escherichia coli and reconstituted into phospholipid vesicles .
Their transport properties demonstrate that the two proteins are isoforms of the glutamate\/H ( + ) symporter described in the past in whole mitochondria .
Isoform 1 is expressed at higher levels than isoform 2 in all the tissues except in brain , where the two isoforms are expressed at comparable levels .
The differences in expression levels and kinetic parameters of the two isoforms suggest that isoform 2 matches the basic requirement of all tissues especially with respect to amino acid degradation , and isoform 1 becomes operative to accommodate higher demands associated with specific metabolic functions such as ureogenesis .
Redox regulation of cell signaling by selenocysteine in mammalian thioredoxin reductases.
The intracellular generation of reactive oxygen species , together with the thioredoxin and glutathione systems , is thought to participate in redox signaling in mammalian cells .
The activity of thioredoxin is dependent on the redox status of thioredoxin reductase ( TR ) , the activity of which in turn is dependent on a selenocysteine residue .
Two mammalian TR isozymes ( TR2 and TR3 ) , in addition to that previously characterized ( TR1 ) , have now been identified in humans and mice .
All three TR isozymes contain a selenocysteine residue that is located in the penultimate position at the carboxyl terminus and which is encoded by a UGA codon .
The generation of reactive oxygen species in a human carcinoma cell line was shown to result in both the oxidation of the selenocysteine in TR1 and a subsequent increase in the expression of this enzyme .
These observations identify the carboxyl-terminal selenocysteine of TR1 as a cellular redox sensor and support an essential role for mammalian TR isozymes in redox-regulated cell signaling .
Characterization of a novel gene in the human major histocompatibility complex that encodes a potential new member of the I kappa B family of proteins.
At least 110 genes are now known to be located in the 4000 kb of DNA encompassing the human major histocompatibility complex ( MHC ) in the chromosome band 6p21 .3 .
Recent genomic sequence analysis of a 90 kb segment of DNA containing the tumor necrosis factor genes in the class III region of the MHC has predicted the presence of three potential exons mapping between the BAT1 and TNFB genes ( 12 ) .
A near full-length cDNA clone corresponding to a novel gene located between BAT1 and TNFB that contains sequence corresponding to one of these putative exons , has been isolated from a premonocytic leukemic cell line cDNA library .
Characterization of this gene reveals that it spans 13.5 kb of DNA , with the 3 ' end of the gene lying approximately 12 kb from the 5 ' end of the TNFB gene .
The cDNA hybridizes to a approximately 1.6 kb mRNA in a number of different cell types , including monocytes , T cells , B cells and hepatocytes .
The putative polypeptide encoded by this cDNA is 381 amino acids in length , with a non-glycosylated M ( r ) of 43214 .
It contains one partial and two full ANK repeats , which bear a marked similarity to those in the I kappa B family of proteins , suggesting that the protein encoded by the novel gene could represent a divergent member of this family .
Isolation, tissue distribution, and chromosomal localization of the human activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID) gene.
The gene encoding activation-induced cytidine deaminase ( AID ) , a member of the cytidine deaminase family , was isolated from a murine B cell lymphoma line , CH12F3-2 , induced by combined stimulation of TGF-beta , IL-4 , and CD40L .
We have isolated the human orthologue of mouse AID cDNA , which has an open reading frame of 198 residues containing a conserved cytidine deaminase motif .
The amino acid sequence of human AID is 92 % identical to that of mouse AID .
RT-PCR analysis of 15 human tissues showed that AID mRNA is expressed strongly in lymph nodes and tonsils .
The complete human AID gene consisting of five exons was isolated and mapped to chromosome 12p13 by fluorescence in situ hybridization .
The p53 family member genes are involved in the Notch signal pathway.
The p53 tumor suppressor is a transcription factor that regulates cell growth and death in response to environmental stimuli such as DNA damage .
p63\/p51 and p73 were recently identified as members of the p53 gene family .
In contrast to p53 however , p63 and p73 are rarely mutated in human cancers .
Mice that lack p53 are developmentally normal , while p63 and p73 appear to play critical roles in normal development .
To determine how p63 and p73 are involved in normal development , we attempted to identify target genes that are specifically regulated by p63 and\/or p73 but not by p53 .
We found that the Jagged1 ( JAG1 ) and Jagged2 ( JAG2 ) genes , encoding ligands for the Notch receptors , are up-regulated by p63 and p73 .
Furthermore , we identified a p63-binding site in the second intron of the JAG1 gene , which can directly interact with the p63 protein in vivo , as assessed by a chromatin immunoprecipitation assay .
A heterologous reporter assay revealed that this p63-binding site is a functional response element and is specific for p63 .
We also found a target of Notch signaling , HES-1 was up-regulated in Jurkat cells , in which Notch1 is highly expressed , when co-cultured with p63-transfected cells , suggesting that p63 can trigger the Notch signal pathway in neighboring cells .
Our findings show an association between the p53 family genes and Notch signaling and suggest a potential molecular mechanism for the involvement of the p53 family genes in normal development .
Antagonistic effects of beta-site amyloid precursor protein-cleaving enzymes 1 and 2 on beta-amyloid peptide production in cells.
The deposition of extracellular beta-amyloid peptide ( A beta ) in the brain is a pathologic feature of Alzheimer 's disease .
The beta-site amyloid precursor protein cleaving enzyme 1 ( BACE1 ) , an integral membrane aspartyl protease responsible for cleavage of amyloid precursor protein ( APP ) at the beta-site , promotes A beta production .
A second integral membrane aspartyl protease related to BACE1 , referred to as beta-site amyloid precursor protein cleaving enzyme 2 ( BACE2 ) has also been demonstrated to cleave APP at the beta-cleavage site in transfected cells .
The role of endogenous BACE2 in A beta production remains unresolved .
We investigated the role of endogenous BACE2 in A beta production in cells by selective inactivation of its transcripts using RNA interference .
We are able to reduce steady state levels for mRNA for each enzyme by ) 85 % , and protein amounts by 88-94 % in cells .
Selective inactivation of BACE1 by RNA interference results in decreased beta-cleaved secreted APP and A beta peptide secretion from cells , as expected .
Selective inactivation of BACE2 by RNAi results in increased beta-cleaved secreted APP and A beta peptide secretion from cells .
Simultaneous targeting of both enzymes by RNA interference does not have any net effect on A beta released from cells .
Our observations of changes in APP metabolism and A beta are consistent with a role of BACE2 in suppressing A beta production in cells that co-express both enzymes .
Complex transcriptional effects of p63 isoforms: identification of novel activation and repression domains.
p63 is a transcription factor structurally related to the p53 tumor suppressor .
The C-terminal region differs from p53 's in that it contains a sterile alpha motif ( SAM ) domain and is subject to multiple alternative splicings .
The N-terminal region is present in the transactivation ( TA ) and DeltaN configurations , with the latter lacking the transcriptional activation domain 1 .
Single amino acid substitutions and frameshift mutations of p63 cause the human ankyloblepharon ectodermal dysplasia clefting ( AEC ) or ectrodactyly ectodermal dysplasia and facial clefting ( EEC ) syndromes .
We have systematically compared the activities of the wild-type p63 isoforms and of the natural mutants in activation and repression assays on three promoters modulated by p53 .
We found that p63 proteins with an altered SAM domain or no SAM domain-the beta isoforms , the EEC frameshift mutant , and the missense AEC mutations-all showed a distinctly higher level of activation of the MDM2 promoter and decreased repression on the HSP70 promoter .
Fusion of SAM to the GAL4 DNA-binding domain repressed a heterologous promoter .
A second activation domain , TA2 , corresponding to exons 11 to 12 , was uncovered by comparing the activation of DeltaN isoforms on natural promoters and in GAL4 fusion systems .
In colony formation assays , the AEC mutants , but not the EEC frameshift , were consistently less efficient in suppressing growth , in both the TA version and the DeltaN version , with respect to their p63alpha counterparts .
These data highlight the modularity of p63 , identifying the SAM domain as a dominant transcriptional repression module and indicating that the AEC and EEC frameshift mutants are characterized by a subversion of the p63 transcriptional potential .
A mammalian homolog of Drosophila melanogaster transcriptional coactivator intersex is a subunit of the mammalian Mediator complex.
The multiprotein Mediator complex is a coactivator required for transcriptional activation of RNA polymerase II transcribed genes by DNA binding transcription factors .
We previously partially purified a Med8-containing Mediator complex from rat liver nuclei ( Brower , C. S. , Sato , S. , Tomomori-Sato , C. , Kamura , T. , Pause , A. , Stearman , R. , Klausner , R. D. , Malik , S. , Lane , W. S. , Sorokina , I. , Roeder , R. G. , Conaway , J. W. , and Conaway , R. C. ( 2002 ) Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
U. S. A. 99 , 10353-10358 ) .
Analysis of proteins present in the most highly enriched Mediator fractions by tandem mass spectrometry led to the identification of several new mammalian Mediator subunits , as well as several potential Mediator subunits .
Here we identify one of these proteins , encoded by the previously uncharacterized AK000411 open reading frame , as a new subunit of the mammalian Mediator complex .
The AK000411 protein , which we designate hIntersex ( human Intersex ) , shares significant sequence similarity with the Drosophila melanogaster intersex protein , which has functional properties expected of a transcriptional coactivator specific for the Drosophila doublesex transactivator .
In addition , we show that hIntersex assembles into a subcomplex with Mediator subunits p28b and TRFP .
Taken together , our findings identify a new subunit of the mammalian Mediator and shed new light on the architecture of the mammalian Mediator complex .
Characterization of copine VII, a new member of the copine family, and its exclusion as a candidate in sporadic breast cancers with loss of heterozygosity at 16q24.3.
In a search for candidate tumor suppressor genes within a 650-kb common region of loss of heterozygosity ( LOH ) at 16q24 .3 in breast cancer tissues , a 2.6-kb cDNA , named copine VII ( CPNE7 ) , was characterized .
The gene is 2654 bp and codes for a 633-residue protein with high homology to the other members of the copine family , such as copine I , copine III , and N-copine .
The predicted amino acid sequence contains two copies of a C2 domain in the N-terminus .
Since these domains have been found in several membrane-binding proteins involved in different intracellular processes , copine VII was viewed as a potential tumor suppressor gene .
Mutation analysis was carried out by single-strand conformation polymorphism analysis of 18 breast tumor tissue samples with ascertained LOH on chromosome 16q24 .3 .
Since only two polymorphisms were identified , no evidence was found to indicate that copine VII is the tumor suppressor gene at 16q24 .3 involved in breast cancer .
Genomic structure of the human ING1 gene and tumor-specific mutations detected in head and neck squamous cell carcinomas.
We characterized the genomic structure of the human ING1 gene , a candidate tumor suppressor gene , and found that the gene has three exons .
We also demonstrated that four mRNA variants were transcribed from three different promoter regions .
Of 34 informative cases of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma , 68 % of tumors showed loss of heterozygosity at chromosome 13q33-34 , where the ING1 gene is located .
Here we present the first report that three missense mutations and three silent changes were detected in the ING1 gene in 6 of 23 tumors with allelic loss at the 13q33-34 region .
These missense mutations were found within the PHD finger domain and nuclear localization motif in ING1 protein , probably abrogating the normal function .
Protein 4.1 R-135 interacts with a novel centrosomal protein (CPAP) which is associated with the gamma-tubulin complex.
Using a yeast two-hybrid system , we isolated a novel human centrosomal protein , CPAP ( centrosomal P4.1-associated protein ) , which specifically interacts with the head domain of the 135-kDa protein 4.1 R isoform ( 4.1R-135 ) .
Sequence analysis revealed that the carboxyl terminus of CPAP has 31.3 % amino acid identity with human Tcp-10 ( a t-complex responder gene product ) .
Interestingly , most of the sequence identity is restricted to two conserved regions .
One carries a leucine zipper , which may form a series of heptad repeats involved in coiled-coil formation ; the other contains unusual glycine repeats with unknown function .
Immunofluorescence analysis revealed that CPAP and gamma-tubulin are localized within the centrosome throughout the cell cycle .
CPAP cosediments with gamma-tubulin in sucrose gradients and coimmunoprecipitates with gamma-tubulin , indicating that CPAP is a part of the gamma-tubulin complex .
Furthermore , functional analysis revealed that CPAP is localized within the center of microtubule asters and may participate in microtubule nucleation .
The formation of microtubule asters was significantly inhibited by anti-CPAP antibody .
Together , these observations indicate that CPAP may play an important role in cell division and centrosome function .
cDNA cloning and expression of two new members of the human liver UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 2B subfamily.
Two new UDP-glucuronosyltransferase cDNAs , designated UGT2B10 and UGT2B11 , encoding 528 amino acid proteins were isolated from a human liver cDNA library .
The deduced amino acid sequences of UGTs 2B10 and 2B11 share ) 76 % sequence similarity with other known human liver UGT2B subfamily isoforms and ( 48 % sequence similarity with UGT1 family proteins .
COS-7 cells transfected with UGT 2B10 and 2B11 synthesized proteins with respective molecular masses of 49kDa and 51kDa .
UGT2B11 expressed in COS-7 cells glucuronidated a number of polyhydroxylated estrogens ( estriol , 4-hydroxyestrone and 2-hydroxyestriol ) and xenobiotics ( 4-methylumbelliferone , 1-naphthol , 4-nitrophenol , 2-aminophenol , 4-hydroxybiphenyl and menthol ) .
Despite the screening of more than forty potential substrates , glucuronidation activity was not observed for expressed UGT2B10 .
Identification of ARAP3, a novel PI3K effector regulating both Arf and Rho GTPases, by selective capture on phosphoinositide affinity matrices.
We show that matrices carrying the tethered homologs of natural phosphoinositides can be used to capture and display multiple phosphoinositide binding proteins in cell and tissue extracts .
We present the mass spectrometric identification of over 20 proteins isolated by this method , mostly from leukocyte extracts : they include known and novel proteins with established phosphoinositide binding domains and also known proteins with surprising and unusual phosphoinositide binding properties .
One of the novel PtdIns ( 3,4,5 ) P3 binding proteins , ARAP3 , has an unusual domain structure , including five predicted PH domains .
We show that it is a specific PtdIns ( 3,4,5 ) P3\/PtdIns ( 3,4 ) P2-stimulated Arf6 GAP both in vitro and in vivo , and both its Arf GAP and Rho GAP domains cooperate in mediating PI3K-dependent rearrangements in the cell cytoskeleton and cell shape .
Prk, a cytokine-inducible human protein serine/threonine kinase whose expression appears to be down-regulated in lung carcinomas.
We have cloned and characterized a putative protein serine\/threonine kinase termed prk through a combination of polymerase chain reaction and conventional cDNA library screening approaches .
There are apparently two distinct domains within prk protein deduced from its nucleotide sequences .
The amino-terminal portion has the feature of the catalytic domain of a serine\/threonine kinase and shows strong homology to mouse fnk and other polo family kinases including mouse snk , human and murine plk , Drosophila polo , and yeast Cdc5 .
The carboxyl-terminal portion , presumably the regulatory domain , shares extensive homology to mouse fnk .
Northern blotting analyses reveal that prk expression is restricted to a very limited number of tissues with placenta , ovaries , and lung containing detectable amounts of prk mRNA .
prk mRNA expression is also detected at a low level in the megakaryocytic cell line Dami , MO7e , and three brain glioma cell lines .
In addition , refeeding of serum-deprived MO7e , Dami , and K562 cells of hematopoietic origin and GMOO637D of lung fibroblasts rapidly activates prk mRNA expression with its peak induction around 2 h after serum addition .
prk gene activation by the serum requires no new protein synthesis .
The recombinant cytokines such as interleukin-3 and thrombopoietin also activate prk mRNA expression in MO7e cells .
Furthermore , a survey of RNAs isolated from the tumor and the uninvolved tissues from 18 lung cancer patients reveals that prk mRNA expression is significantly down-regulated in tumor tissues .
Southern blotting analysis indicates that the prk gene is present in a single copy in the genome of tumors and normal cells .
Taken together , these results suggest that prk expression may be restricted to proliferating cells and involved in the regulation of cell cycle progression .
The molecular cloning of prk cDNA will facilitate the study of its biological role as well as its potential role in tumorigenesis .
Molecular, functional, and genomic characterization of human KCC2, the neuronal K-Cl cotransporter.
The expression level of the neuronal-specific K-Cl cotransporter KCC2 ( SLC12A5 ) is a major determinant of whether neurons will respond to GABA with a depolarizing , excitatory response or a hyperpolarizing , inhibitory response .
In view of the potential role in human neuronal excitability we have characterized the hKCC2 cDNA and gene .
The 5.9 kb hKCC2 transcript is specific to brain , and is induced during in vitro differentiation of NT2 teratocarcinoma cells into neuronal NT2-N cells .
The 24-exon SLC12A5 gene is on human chromosome 20q13 , and contains a polymorphic dinucleotide repeat within intron 1 near a potential binding site for neuron-restrictive silencing factor .
Expression of hKCC2 cRNA in Xenopus laevis oocytes results in significant Cl ( - ) - dependent ( 86 ) Rb ( + ) uptake under isotonic conditions ; cell swelling under hypotonic conditions causes a 20-fold activation , which is blocked by the protein phosphatase inhibitor calyculin-A .
In contrast , oocytes expressing mouse KCC4 do not mediate isotonic K-Cl cotransport but express much higher absolute transport activity than KCC2 oocytes under hypotonic conditions .
Initial and steady state kinetics of hKCC2-injected oocytes were performed in both isotonic and hypotonic conditions , revealing K ( m ) s for K ( + ) and Cl ( - ) of 9.3 + \/ -1.8 mM and 6.8 + \/ -0.9 mM , respectively ; both affinities are significantly higher than KCC1 and KCC4 .
The K ( m ) for Cl ( - ) is close to the intracellular Cl ( - ) activity of mature neurons , as befits a neuronal efflux mechanism .
Characterization of C14orf4, a novel intronless human gene containing a polyglutamine repeat, mapped to the ARVD1 critical region.
Within the ARVD1 ( arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia\/cardiomyopathy , type 1 ) critical region , mapped to 14q24 .3 , we detected an intronless gene of 4859 bp , predominantly expressed in the heart tissue .
This gene encodes a 796-amino-acid , proline-rich protein showing polyglutamine and polyalanine tracks with variable length at the N-terminus and a C3HC4 RING finger domain at the C-terminus .
CREB and AP-2 binding sites are present in the promoter region .
The 5 ' flanking region contains neither a TATA box nor a CAAT box , but it is high in GC content and includes several Sp1 binding sites .
Protein similarity searches revealed a significant match between the C-terminus and a human hypothetical protein , whose gene is located on the chromosome 19 long arm .
The predicted protein shows PEST sequences , suggesting its rapid degradation .
The novel intronless gene , provisionally named C14orf4 and probably encoding a nuclear protein , was excluded from being the ARVD1 gene .
VIPL, a VIP36-like membrane protein with a putative function in the export of glycoproteins from the endoplasmic reticulum.
Subsets of glycoproteins are thought to require lectin-like membrane receptors for efficient export out of the endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) .
To identify new members related to two previously characterized intracellular lectins ERGIC-53 \/ p58 and VIP36 , we carried out an extensive database search using the conserved carbohydrate recognition domain ( CRD ) as a search string .
A gene , more closely related to VIP36 than to ERGIC-53 \/ p58 , and hence called VIPL ( VIP36-Like ) , was identified .
VIPL has been conserved through evolution from zebra fish to man .
The 2.4-kb VIPL mRNA was widely expressed to varying levels in different tissues .
Using an antiserum prepared against the CRD , the 32-kDa VIPL protein was detected in various cell lines .
The single N-linked glycan of VIPL remained endoglycosidase H-sensitive during a 2-h pulse-chase , even when the protein was overexpressed or mutated to allow export to the plasma membrane .
VIPL localized primarily to the ER and partly to the Golgi complex .
Like VIP36 , the cytoplasmic tail of VIPL terminates in the sequence KRFY , a motif characteristic for proteins recycling between the ER and ERGIC\/cis-Golgi .
Mutating the retrograde transport signal KR to AA resulted in transport of VIPL to the cell surface .
Finally , knock-down of VIPL mRNA using siRNA significantly slowed down the secretion of two glycoproteins ( M ( R ) 35 and 250 kDa ) to the medium , suggesting that VIPL may also function as an ER export receptor .
Presenilin 1 interaction in the brain with a novel member of the Armadillo family.
One approach to understanding the function of presenilin 1 ( PS1 ) , is to discover those proteins with which it interacts .
Evidence for a function in developmental patterning came from C. elegans , in which a PS homolog was identified by screening for suppressors of a mutation in Notch\/lin -12 , a gene which specifies cell fate .
However , this genetic experiment can not determine which proteins directly interact with PS1 .
Therefore , we utilized the two hybrid system and confirmatory co-immunoprecipitations to identify a novel catenin , termed delta-catenin , which interacts with PS1 and is principally expressed in brain .
The catenins are a gene family related to the Armadillo gene in Drosophila , some of which appear to have dual roles-they are components of cell-cell adherens junctions , and may serve as intermediates in the Wingless ( Wg ) signaling pathway , which , like Notch\/lin -12 , is also responsible for a variety of inductive signaling events .
In the non-neuronal 293 cell line , PS1 interacted with beta-catenin , the family member with the greatest homology to Armadillo .
Wg and Notch interactions are mediated by the Dishevelled gene , which may form a signaling complex with PS1 and Wg pathway intermediates to regulate the function of the Notch\/lin -12 gene .
Isolation and characterization of monoclonal antibodies directed against subunits of human RNA polymerases I, II, and III.
Human nuclei contain three different RNA polymerases : polymerases I , II , and III .
Each polymerase is a multi-subunit enzyme with 12-17 subunits .
The localization of these subunits is limited by the paucity of antibodies suitable for immunofluorescence .
We now describe eight different monoclonal antibodies that react specifically with RPB6 ( also known as RPA20 , RPB14 .4 , or RPC20 ) , RPB8 ( RPA18 , RPB17 , or RPC18 ) , RPC32 , or RPC39 and which are suitable for such studies .
Each antibody detects one specific band in immunoblots of nuclear extracts ; each also immunoprecipitates large complexes containing many other subunits .
When used for immunofluorescence , antibodies against the subunits shared by all three polymerases ( i.e. , RPB6 , RPB8 ) gave a few bright foci in nucleoli and nucleoplasm , as well as many fainter nucleoplasmic foci ; all the bright foci were generally distinct from speckles containing Sm antigen .
Antibodies against the two subunits found only in polymerase III ( i.e. , RPC32 , RPC39 ) gave a few bright and many faint nucleoplasmic foci , but no nucleolar foci .
Growth in two transcriptional inhibitors-5 , 6-dichloro-1-beta-d-ribofuranosylbenzimidazole and actinomycin D-led to the redistribution of each subunit in a characteristic manner .
The C-terminus of the HTLV-1 Tax oncoprotein mediates interaction with the PDZ domain of cellular proteins.
Infection by HTLV-1 has been correlated with the appearance of various proliferative or degenerative diseases .
Some of these disorders have been observed in transgenic mice expressing the Tax protein , which is known to transactivate various viral and cellular promoters through interactions with several transcription factors .
In this study we show that the C-terminus of this viral oncoprotein represents a motif permitting binding of Tax to the PDZ domains of several cellular proteins .
A two-hybrid screen with Tax as bait indeed yielded complementary DNAs coding for six proteins including PDZ domains .
Two of them correspond to truncated forms of the PSD-95 and beta1-syntrophin proteins , another clone codes for a protein homologous to the product of the C. elegans gene lin-7 .
The other three clones code for new human members of the PDZ family of cellular proteins .
The interaction of Tax with the products of these clones was confirmed by immunoprecipitation assays in mammalian cells , and analysis of various mutants of Tax established the importance of the C-terminal amino acids for several of these interactions .
These data suggest that Tax could perturb the normal function of targeted cellular proteins by strongly interacting with their PDZ domains .
Functional expression of the human hZIP2 zinc transporter.
Zinc is an essential nutrient for humans , yet we know little about how this metal ion is taken up by mammalian cells .
In this report , we describe the characterization of hZip2 , a human zinc transporter identified by its similarity to zinc transporters recently characterized in fungi and plants .
hZip2 is a member of the ZIP family of eukaryotic metal ion transporters that includes two other human genes , hZIP1 and hZIP3 , and genes in mice and rats .
To test whether hZip2 is a zinc transporter , we examined ( 65 ) Zn uptake activity in transfected K562 erythroleukemia cells expressing hZip2 from the CMV promoter .
hZip2-expressing cells accumulated more zinc than control cells because of an increased initial zinc uptake rate .
This activity was time - , temperature - , and concentration-dependent and saturable with an apparent K ( m ) of 3 microM .
hZip2 zinc uptake activity was inhibited by several other transition metals , suggesting that this protein may transport other substrates as well .
hZip2 activity was not energy-dependent , nor did it require K ( + ) or Na ( + ) gradients .
Zinc uptake by hZip2 was stimulated by HCO ( 3 ) ( - ) treatment , suggesting a Zn ( 2 + ) - HCO ( 3 ) ( - ) cotransport mechanism .
Finally , hZip2 was exclusively localized in the plasma membrane .
These results indicate that hZip2 is a zinc transporter , and its identification provides one of the first molecular tools to study zinc uptake in mammalian cells .
A novel human odorant-binding protein gene family resulting from genomic duplicons at 9q34: differential expression in the oral and genital spheres.
Lipocalins are carrier proteins for hydrophobic molecules in many biological fluids .
In the oral sphere ( nasal mucus , saliva , tears ) , they have an environmental biosensor function and are involved in the detection of odours and pheromones .
Herein , we report the first identification of human lipocalins involved in odorant binding .
They correspond to a gene family located on human chromosome 9q34 produced by genomic duplications : two new odorant-binding protein genes ( hOBP ( IIa ) and hOBP ( IIb ) ) , the previously described tear lipocalin LCN1 gene and two new LCN1 pseudogenes .
Although 95 % similar in sequence , the two hOBP ( II ) genes were differentially expressed in secretory structures .
hOBP ( IIa ) was strongly expressed in the nasal structures , salivary and lachrymal glands , and lung , therefore having an oral sphere profile .
hOBP ( IIb ) was more strongly expressed in genital sphere organs such as the prostate and mammary glands .
Both were expressed in the male deferent ducts and placenta .
Surprisingly , alternatively spliced mRNAs resulting in proteins with different C-termini were generated from each of the two genes .
The single LCN1 gene in humans generated a putative odorant-binding protein in nasal structures .
Finally , based on the proposed successive genomic duplication history , we demonstrated the recruitment of exons within intronic DNA generating diversity .
This is consistent with a positive selection pressure in vertebrate evolution in the intron-late hypothesis .
Bcl-G, a novel pro-apoptotic member of the Bcl-2 family.
A new member of the Bcl-2 family was identified , Bcl-G .
The human BCL-G gene consists of 6 exons , resides on chromosome 12p12 , and encodes two proteins through alternative mRNA splicing , Bcl-G ( L ) ( long ) and Bcl-G ( S ) ( short ) consisting of 327 and 252 amino acids in length , respectively .
Bcl-G ( L ) and Bcl-G ( S ) have identical sequences for the first 226 amino acids but diverge thereafter .
Among the Bcl-2 homology ( BH ) domains previously recognized in Bcl-2 family proteins , the BH3 domain is found in both Bcl-G ( L ) and Bcl-G ( S ) , but only the longer Bcl-G ( L ) protein possesses a BH2 domain .
Bcl-G ( L ) mRNA is expressed widely in adult human tissues , whereas Bcl-G ( S ) mRNA was found only in testis .
Overexpression of Bcl-G ( L ) or Bcl-G ( S ) in cells induced apoptosis although Bcl-G ( S ) was far more potent than Bcl-G ( L ) .
Apoptosis induction by Bcl-G ( S ) depended on the BH3 domain and was suppressed by coexpression of anti-apoptotic Bcl-X ( L ) protein .
Bcl-X ( L ) also coimmunoprecipitated with Bcl-G ( S ) but not with mutants of Bcl-G ( S ) in which the BH3 domain was deleted or mutated or with Bcl-G ( L ) .
Bcl-G ( S ) was predominantly localized to cytosolic organelles , whereas Bcl-G ( L ) was diffusely distributed throughout the cytosol .
A mutant of Bcl-G ( L ) in which the BH2 domain was deleted displayed increased apoptotic activity and coimmunoprecipitated with Bcl-X ( L ) , suggesting that the BH2 domain autorepresses Bcl-G ( L ) .
Homology between a human apoptosis specific protein and the product of APG5, a gene involved in autophagy in yeast.
Apoptosis specific proteins ( ASP ) are expressed in the cytoplasm of cultured mammalian cells of various lineages following induction of apoptosis .
The cDNA encoding ASP has been cloned from a human expression library and has significant homology to the Saccharomyces cerevisiae APG5 gene which is essential for yeast autophagy .
The ASP gene , known as hAPG5 , can be transcribed to give mRNAs of 3.3 kbp , 2.5 kbp and 1.8 kbp which are present at comparable levels in viable and apoptotic cells , demonstrating that protein expression must be regulated at the translational level .
These data indicate a possible relationship between apoptosis and autophagy and suggest evolutionary conservation in mammalian apoptosis of a degradative process present in yeast .
Identification of a novel thioredoxin-related transmembrane protein.
We recently identified a series of transforming growth factor-beta-responsive genes in A549 human adenocarcinoma cell line by a gene trap screening method .
Here we report the molecular cloning and characterization of one of these genes , designated TMX , that encodes a novel protein of 280 amino acid residues .
The TMX protein possesses an N-terminal signal peptide followed by one thioredoxin ( Trx ) - like domain with a unique active site sequence , Cys-Pro-Ala-Cys , and a potential transmembrane domain .
There are putative TMX homologs with identical active site sequences in the Caenorhabditis elegans and Drosophila genomes .
Using recombinant proteins expressed in Escherichia coli , we demonstrated the activity of the Trx domain of TMX to cleave the interchain disulfide bridges in insulin in vitro .
The TMX transcript is widely expressed in normal human tissues , and subcellular fractionation and immunostaining for an epitope-tagged TMX protein suggest that TMX is predominantly localized in the endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) .
When TMX was expressed in HEK293 cells , it significantly suppressed the apoptosis induced by brefeldin A , an inhibitor of ER-Golgi transport .
This activity was abolished when two Cys residues in the active site sequence were mutated to Ser , suggesting that the Trx-like activity of TMX may help relieve ER stress caused by brefeldin A.
Cloning and mapping of the XRN2 gene to human chromosome 20p11.1-p11.2.
The Dhm1 gene is the mouse homolog of the dhp1 ( + ) gene of Schizosaccharomyces pombe , which is involved in homologous recombination and RNA metabolism , such as RNA synthesis and RNA trafficking , in S. pombe .
Complementation analysis showed the Dhm1 gene on a multicopy plasmid can rescue the temperature-sensitivity mutation of dhp1 ( ts ) and the lethality of the dhp1 null mutation .
This finding suggests that Dhm1 has a function in mouse similar to that of dhp1 ( + ) .
The human homolog of this gene , XRN2 , has been identified .
A 3.6-kb transcript of XRN2 was detected in 16 tissues examined and was more abundant in testis .
By radiation hybrid panel mapping , the XRN2 gene was localized to chromosome 20p11.1-p11 .2 between markers D20S180 and D20S871 .
NXF5, a novel member of the nuclear RNA export factor family, is lost in a male patient with a syndromic form of mental retardation.
BACKGROUND : Although X-linked mental retardation ( XLMR ) affects 2 % -3 % of the human population , little is known about the underlying molecular mechanisms .
Recent interest in this topic led to the identification of several genes for which mutations result in the disturbance of cognitive development .
RESULTS : We identified a novel gene that is interrupted by an inv ( X ) ( p21 .1 ; q22 ) in a male patient with a syndromic form of mental retardation .
Molecular analysis of both breakpoint regions did not reveal an interrupted gene on Xp , but identified a novel nuclear RNA export factor ( NXF ) gene cluster , Xcen-NXF5-NXF2-NXF4-NXF3-Xqter , in which NXF5 is split by the breakpoint , leading to its functional nullisomy .
The predicted NXF5 protein shows high similarity with the central part of the presumed mRNA nuclear export factor TAP\/NXF1 .
Functional analysis of NXF5 demonstrates binding to RNA as well as to the RNA nuclear export-associated protein p15\/NXT .
In contrast to TAP\/NXF1 , overexpression studies localized NXF5 in the form of granules in the cell body and neurites of mature hippocampal neurons , suggesting a role in mRNA transport .
The two newly identified mouse nxf homologs , nxf-a and nxf-b , which also map on X , show highest mRNA levels in the brain .
CONCLUSIONS : A novel member of the nuclear RNA export factor family is absent in a male patient with a syndromic form of mental retardation .
Although we did not find direct evidence for the involvement of NXF5 in MR , the gene could be involved in development , possibly through a process in mRNA metabolism in neurons .
Human IL-21 and IL-4 bind to partially overlapping epitopes of common gamma-chain.
Interleukin 21 ( IL-21 ) is a recently identified novel cytokine that plays an important role in the regulation of B , T , and NK cell functions .
Its effects depend on binding to and signaling through an IL-21 receptor complex consisting of the IL-21 receptor ( IL-21R ) and the common gamma-chain ( gamma ( c ) ) .
In this study using biosensor technique , the ligand-binding properties of IL-21R and gamma ( c ) , which are presently poorly understood on a molecular level , were analyzed employing recombinant ectodomains of IL-21R and gamma ( c ) .
The formation of a binary complex between IL-21 and immobilized IL-21R ( K ( D ) 70pM ) , gamma ( c ) and immobilized IL-21 ( K ( D ) 160 microM ) and a ternary complex between gamma ( c ) and IL-21 saturated immobilized IL-21R ( K ( D ) 160nM ) could be analyzed .
The gamma ( c ) residues involved in IL-21 binding were defined by alanine-scanning mutational analysis .
The epitope comprises gamma ( c ) residues N44 , Y103 , N128 , L161 , E162 , and L208 .
It is not identical but partially overlapping with the previously established gamma ( c ) epitope for IL-4 binding .
These results open the way to understand the molecular recognition mechanism in the IL-21 receptor system and also the promiscuous binding properties of gamma ( c ) .
Molecular cloning of globotriaosylceramide/CD77 synthase, a glycosyltransferase that initiates the synthesis of globo series glycosphingolipids.
The expression cloning of a cDNA for globotriaosylceramide ( Gb3 ) \/ CD77 synthase ( alpha1,4-galactosyltransferase ) was achieved using an anti-Gb3 antibody and mouse L cells as a recipient cell line for the transfection .
The isolated cDNA clone designated pVTR1 predicted a type II membrane protein with 19 amino acids of cytoplasmic domain , 26 amino acids of transmembrane region , and a catalytic domain with 308 amino acids .
Introduction of the cDNA clone into L cells resulted in the neosynthesis of Gb3\/CD77 , and the extracts of the transfectant cells showed alpha1 , 4-galactosyltransferase activity only on lactosylceramide and galactosylceramide .
In Northern blotting , a 2.3-kilobase mRNA was strongly expressed in heart , kidney , spleen , and placenta and weakly in colon , small intestine , and brain .
Transfection of the cDNA into L cells resulted in the constitution of sensitivity to the apoptosis with Shiga-like toxins ( verotoxins ) .
Since Gb3\/CD77 synthase initiates the synthesis of globo series glycolipids , the isolation of this cDNA will make possible further investigations into the function of its important series of glycolipids .
SLIT2-mediated ROBO2 signaling restricts kidney induction to a single site.
Kidney development occurs in a stereotypic position along the body axis .
It begins when a single ureteric bud emerges from the nephric duct in response to GDNF secreted by the adjacent nephrogenic mesenchyme .
Posterior restriction of Gdnf expression is considered critical for correct positioning of ureteric bud development .
Here we show that mouse mutants lacking either SLIT2 or its receptor ROBO2 , molecules known primarily for their function in axon guidance and cell migration , develop supernumerary ureteric buds that remain inappropriately connected to the nephric duct , and that the SLIT2\/ROBO2 signal is transduced in the nephrogenic mesenchyme .
Furthermore , we show that Gdnf expression is inappropriately maintained in anterior nephrogenic mesenchyme in these mutants .
Thus our data identify an intercellular signaling system that restricts , directly or indirectly , the extent of the Gdnf expression domain , thereby precisely positioning the site of kidney induction .
Ca2+-dependent potentiation of the nonselective cation channel TRPV4 is mediated by a C-terminal calmodulin binding site.
Most Ca2 + - permeable ion channels are inhibited by increases in the intracellular Ca2 + concentration ( ( Ca2 + ) i ) , thus preventing potentially deleterious rises in ( Ca2 + ) i. In this study , we demonstrate that currents through the osmo - , heat - and phorbol ester-sensitive , Ca2 + - permeable nonselective cation channel TRPV4 are potentiated by intracellular Ca2 + .
Spontaneous TRPV4 currents and currents stimulated by hypotonic solutions or phorbol esters were reduced strongly at all potentials in the absence of extracellular Ca2 + .
The other permeant divalent cations Ba2 + and Sr2 + were less effective than Ca2 + in supporting channel activity .
An intracellular site of Ca2 + action was supported by the parallel decrease in spontaneous currents and ( Ca2 + ) i on removal of extracellular Ca2 + and the ability of Ca2 + release from intracellular stores to restore TRPV4 activity in the absence of extracellular Ca2 + .
During TRPV4 activation by hypotonic solutions or phorbol esters , Ca2 + entry through the channel increased the rate and extent of channel activation .
Currents were also potentiated by ionomycin in the presence of extracellular Ca2 + .
Ca2 + - dependent potentiation of TRPV4 was often followed by inhibition .
By mutagenesis , we localized the structural determinant of Ca2 + - dependent potentiation to an intracellular , C-terminal calmodulin binding domain .
This domain binds calmodulin in a Ca2 + - dependent manner .
TRPV4 mutants that did not bind calmodulin lacked Ca2 + - dependent potentiation .
We conclude that TRPV4 activity is tightly controlled by intracellular Ca2 + .
Ca2 + entry increases both the rate and extent of channel activation by a calmodulin-dependent mechanism .
Excessive increases in ( Ca2 + ) i via TRPV4 are prevented by a Ca2 + - dependent negative feedback mechanism .
Three human RNA polymerase III-specific subunits form a subcomplex with a selective function in specific transcription initiation.
Transcription by RNA polymerase III involves recruitment of the polymerase by template-bound accessory factors , followed by initiation , elongation , and termination steps .
An immunopurification approach has been used to demonstrate that human RNA Pol III is composed of 16 subunits , some of which are apparently modified in HeLa cells .
Partial denaturing conditions and sucrose gradient sedimentation at high salt result in the dissociation of a subcomplex that includes hRPC32 , hRPC39 , and hRPC62 .
Cognate cDNAs were isolated and shown to encode three subunits that are specific to RNA Pol III and homologous to three yeast subunits .
The human RNA Pol III core lacking the subcomplex functions in transcription elongation and termination following nonspecific initiation on a tailed template , but fails to show promoter-dependent transcription initiation in conjunction with accessory factors .
The capability for specific transcription initiation can be restored either by the natural subcomplex or by a stable subcomplex composed of recombinant hRPC32 , hRPC39 , and hRPC62 polypeptides .
One component ( hRPC39 ) of this subcomplex interacts physically with both hTBP and hTFIIIB90 , two subunits of human RNA Pol III transcription initiation factor IIIB .
These data strongly suggest that the hRPC32-hRPC39-hRPC62 subcomplex directs RNA Pol III binding to the TFIIIB-DNA complex via the interactions between TFIIIB and hRPC39 .
Atrophin-1, the DRPLA gene product, interacts with two families of WW domain-containing proteins.
Atrophin-1 contains a polyglutamine repeat , expansion of which is responsible for dentatorubral and pallidoluysian atrophy ( DRPLA ) .
The normal function of atrophin-1 is unknown .
We have identified five atrophin-1 interacting proteins ( AIPs ) which bind to atrophin-1 in the vicinity of the polyglutamine tract using the yeast two-hybrid system .
Four of the interactions were confirmed using in vitro binding assays .
All five interactors contained multiple WW domains .
Two are novel .
The AIPs can be divided into two distinct classes .
AIP1 and AIP3\/WWP3 are MAGUK-like multidomain proteins containing a number of protein-protein interaction modules , namely a guanylate kinase-like region , two WW domains , and multiple PDZ domains .
AIP2\/WWP2 , AIP4 , and AIP5\/WWP1 are highly homologous , each having four WW domains and a HECT domain characteristic of ubiquitin ligases .
These interactors are similar to recently isolated huntingtin-interacting proteins , suggesting possible commonality of function between two proteins responsible for very similar diseases .
IL-17E, a novel proinflammatory ligand for the IL-17 receptor homolog IL-17Rh1.
We report identification of interleukin ( IL ) -17 E , a novel member of the IL-17 family of cytokines .
IL-17E is a ligand for the recently identified protein termed EVI27\/IL -17 BR , which we term IL-17 receptor homolog 1 ( IL-17Rh1 ) in light of the multiple reported ligand-receptor relationships .
Murine EVI27 was identified through its location at a common site of retroviral integration in BXH2 murine myeloid leukemias .
IL-17Rh1 shows highest level expression in kidney with moderate expression in multiple other organs , whereas IL-17E mRNA was detected at very low levels in several peripheral tissues .
IL-17E induces activation of NF-kappaB and stimulates production of the proinflammatory chemokine IL-8 .
Rab6c, a new member of the rab gene family, is involved in drug resistance in MCF7/AdrR cells.
A new Rab6 homolog cDNA , Rab6c , was discovered by a hypermethylated DNA fragment probe that was isolated from a human multidrug resistant ( MDR ) breast cancer cell line , MCF7\/AdrR , by the methylation sensitive-representational difference analysis ( MS-RDA ) technique .
Rab6c was found to be under-expressed in MCF7\/AdrR and MES-SA\/Dx5 ( a human MDR uterine sarcoma cell line ) compared with their non-MDR parental cell lines .
MCF7\/AdrR cells expressing the exogenous Rab6c exhibited less resistance to several anti-cancer drugs , such as doxorubicin ( DOX ) , taxol , vinblastine , and vincristine , than the control cells containing the empty vector .
Flow cytometry experiments confirmed that the transfectants ' diminished resistance to DOX was caused by increased drug accumulation induced by the exogenous Rab6c .
These results indicate that Rab6c is involved in drug resistance in MCF7\/AdrR cells .
A C-terminal inhibitory domain controls the activity of p63 by an intramolecular mechanism.
The human genome is far smaller than originally estimated , and one explanation is that alternative splicing creates greater proteomic complexity than a simple count of open reading frames would suggest .
The p53 homolog p63 , for example , is a tetrameric transcription factor implicated in epithelial development and expressed as at least six isoforms with widely differing transactivation potential .
In particular , p63alpha isoforms contain a 27-kDa C-terminal region that drastically reduces their activity and is of clear biological importance , since patients with deletions in this C terminus have phenotypes very similar to patients with mutations in the DNA-binding domain .
We have identified a novel domain within this C terminus that is necessary and sufficient for transcriptional inhibition and which acts by binding to a region in the N-terminal transactivation domain of p63 homologous to the MDM2 binding site in p53 .
Based on this mechanism , we provide a model that explains the transactivation potential of homo - and heterotetramers composed of different p63 isoforms and their effect on p53 .
Retrovirally mediated complementation of the glyB phenotype. Cloning of a human gene encoding the carrier for entry of folates into mitochondria.
The transduction of a human placental cDNA retroviral library into glyB cells , a Chinese hamster ovary K1 subline that is deficient in the transport of folates into mitochondria , resulted in the complementation of glycine auxotrophy of these cells .
A 2.6-kilobase pair cDNA insert flanked by retroviral sequences had integrated into genomic DNA in rescued cells .
An open reading frame in this cDNA encoded a 35-kDa protein homologous to several inner mitochondrial wall transporters for intermediate metabolites .
The subcloned cDNA complemented the glycine auxotrophy of glyB cells and reinstated folate accumulation in the mitochondria of transfected cells .
The human origin , chromosomal location , and intron-exon organization of the isolated mitochondrial folate transporter gene were deduced from the expressed sequence tag database and human genome project data .
Cloning, gene structure and genomic localization of an orphan transporter from mouse kidney with six alternatively-spliced isoforms.
Two genes were identified and characterized that express cDNAs related to previously identified neurotransmitter and\/or osmolyte transporters , but which are expressed specifically in the kidney .
RNA transcribed from one of these two genes ( XT2 ) was found to undergo an extensive degree of alternative splicing to generate six distinct isoforms .
The intron-exon structure of the XT2 gene and the sites of alternative splicing were identified .
Expression of the second gene ( XT3 ) was found to be conserved in human kidney , and partial sequence was obtained from a human cDNA library .
The expressions of both XT2 and XT3 RNAs were determined in mouse and human tissues , respectively , and the locations of the two genes within the mouse genome were identified .
Screening experiments to identify the substrate ( s ) of these proteins failed to identify specific uptake with any of the tested compounds ; however , immunofluorescent microscopy demonstrated that epitope-tagged variants of the protein products of the XT2 and XT3 cDNAs were present on the plasma membrane of transfected cells .
Hepatocyte nuclear factor-6: associations between genetic variability and type II diabetes and between genetic variability and estimates of insulin secretion.
AIMS\/HYPOTHESIS : The transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor ( HNF ) -6 is an upstream regulator of several genes involved in the pathogenesis of maturity-onset diabetes of the young .
We therefore tested the hypothesis that variability in the HNF-6 gene is associated with subsets of Type II ( non-insulin-dependent ) diabetes mellitus and estimates of insulin secretion in glucose tolerant subjects .
METHODS : We cloned the coding region as well as the intron-exon boundaries of the HNF-6 gene .
We then examined them on genomic DNA in six MODY probands without mutations in the MODY1 , MODY3 and MODY4 genes and in 54 patients with late-onset Type II diabetes by combined single strand conformational polymorphism-heteroduplex analysis followed by direct sequencing of identified variants .
An identified missense variant was examined in association studies and genotype-phenotype studies .
RESULTS : We identified two silent and one missense ( Pro75 Ala ) variant .
In an association study the allelic frequency of the Pro75Ala polymorphism was 3.2 % ( 95 % confidence interval , 1.9-4 .5 ) in 330 patients with Type II diabetes mellitus compared with 4.2 % ( 2.4-6 .0 ) in 238 age-matched glucose tolerant control subjects .
Moreover , in studies of 238 middle-aged glucose tolerant subjects , of 226 glucose tolerant offspring of Type II diabetic patients and of 367 young healthy subjects , the carriers of the polymorphism did not differ from non-carriers in glucose induced serum insulin or C-peptide responses .
CONCLUSION\/INTERPRETATION : Mutations in the coding region of the HNF-6 gene are not associated with Type II diabetes or with changes in insulin responses to glucose among the Caucasians examined .
Identification of the platelet ADP receptor targeted by antithrombotic drugs.
Platelets have a crucial role in the maintenance of normal hemostasis , and perturbations of this system can lead to pathological thrombus formation and vascular occlusion , resulting in stroke , myocardial infarction and unstable angina .
ADP released from damaged vessels and red blood cells induces platelet aggregation through activation of the integrin GPIIb-IIIa and subsequent binding of fibrinogen .
ADP is also secreted from platelets on activation , providing positive feedback that potentiates the actions of many platelet activators .
ADP mediates platelet aggregation through its action on two G-protein-coupled receptor subtypes .
The P2Y1 receptor couples to Gq and mobilizes intracellular calcium ions to mediate platelet shape change and aggregation .
The second ADP receptor required for aggregation ( variously called P2Y ( ADP ) , P2Y ( AC ) , P2Ycyc or P2T ( AC ) ) is coupled to the inhibition of adenylyl cyclase through Gi .
The molecular identity of the Gi-linked receptor is still elusive , even though it is the target of efficacious antithrombotic agents , such as ticlopidine and clopidogrel and AR-C66096 ( ref .
9 ) .
Here we describe the cloning of this receptor , designated P2Y12 , and provide evidence that a patient with a bleeding disorder has a defect in this gene .
Cloning of the P2Y12 receptor should facilitate the development of better antiplatelet agents to treat cardiovascular diseases .
Cloning of CCRL1, an orphan seven transmembrane receptor related to chemokine receptors, expressed abundantly in the heart.
In an attempt to identify novel chemokine receptor genes , cDNA expressed sequence tags ( EST ) were analyzed for a significant homology with mammalian chemokine receptors .
The sequence from one of the selected EST clones was used to generate a full-length cDNA encoding a putative seven transmembrane receptor , CCRL1-CC chemokine receptor like 1 .
The full-length receptor encodes a polypeptide of 350 amino acids and has about 35 % homology to the chemokine receptors CCR6 and CCR7 .
Northern blot analysis indicates predominant expression of about 5.0 , 2.0 and 1.3 kb mRNA forms in human heart tissue , while low-level expression of the 2.0 and 1.3 kb forms was observed in lung , pancreas and spleen and in fetal tissues .
In-situ hybridization confirmed the presence of CCRL1 mRNA in cardiac muscle cells .
Similar to the chemokine receptor CCR6 , CCRL1 maps to chromosome 6 and has one intron in the 5 ' untranslated region .
Coupled transcription-translation of CCRL1 cDNA yielded a glycosylated polypeptide of about 45kDa .
A SMAD ubiquitin ligase targets the BMP pathway and affects embryonic pattern formation.
The TGF-beta superfamily of proteins regulates many different biological processes , including cell growth , differentiation and embryonic pattern formation .
TGF-beta-like factors signal across cell membranes through complexes of transmembrane receptors known as type I and type II serine\/threonine-kinase receptors , which in turn activate the SMAD signalling pathway .
On the inside of the cell membrane , a receptor-regulated class of SMADs are phosphorylated by the type-I-receptor kinase .
In this way , receptors for different factors are able to pass on specific signals along the pathway : for example , receptors for bone morphogenetic protein ( BMP ) target SMADs 1 , 5 and 8 , whereas receptors for activin and TGF-beta target SMADs 2 and 3 .
Phosphorylation of receptor-regulated SMADs induces their association with Smad4 , the ` common-partner ' SMAD , and stimulates accumulation of this complex in the nucleus , where it regulates transcriptional responses .
Here we describe Smurf1 , a new member of the Hect family of E3 ubiquitin ligases .
Smurf1 selectively interacts with receptor-regulated SMADs specific for the BMP pathway in order to trigger their ubiquitination and degradation , and hence their inactivation .
In the amphibian Xenopus laevis , Smurf1 messenger RNA is localized to the animal pole of the egg ; in Xenopus embryos , ectopic Smurf1 inhibits the transmission of BMP signals and thereby affects pattern formation .
Smurf1 also enhances cellular responsiveness to the Smad2 ( activin\/TGF-beta ) pathway .
Thus , targeted ubiquitination of SMADs may serve to control both embryonic development and a wide variety of cellular responses to TGF-beta signals .
Identification of a novel system L amino acid transporter structurally distinct from heterodimeric amino acid transporters.
A cDNA that encodes a novel Na + - independent neutral amino acid transporter was isolated from FLC4 human hepatocarcinoma cells by expression cloning .
When expressed in Xenopus oocytes , the encoded protein designated LAT3 ( L-type amino acid transporter 3 ) transported neutral amino acids such as l-leucine , l-isoleucine , l-valine , and l-phenylalanine .
The LAT3-mediated transport was Na + - independent and inhibited by 2-aminobicyclo ( 2.2.1 ) heptane-2-carboxylic acid , consistent with the properties of system L. Distinct from already known system L transporters LAT1 and LAT2 , which form heterodimeric complex with 4F2 heavy chain , LAT3 was functional by itself in Xenopus oocytes .
The deduced amino acid sequence of LAT3 was identical to the gene product of POV1 reported as a prostate cancer-up-regulated gene whose function was not determined , whereas it did not exhibit significant similarity to already identified transporters .
The Eadie-Hofstee plots of LAT3-mediated transport were curvilinear , whereas the low affinity component is predominant at physiological plasma amino acid concentration .
In addition to amino acid substrates , LAT3 recognized amino acid alcohols .
The transport of l-leucine was electroneutral and mediated by a facilitated diffusion .
In contrast , l-leucinol , l-valinol , and l-phenylalaninol , which have a net positive charge induced inward currents under voltage clamp , suggesting these compounds are transported by LAT3 .
LAT3-mediated transport was inhibited by the pretreatment with N-ethylmaleimide , consistent with the property of system L2 originally characterized in hepatocyte primary culture .
Based on the substrate selectivity , affinity , and N-ethylmaleimide sensitivity , LAT3 is proposed to be a transporter subserving system L2 .
LAT3 should denote a new family of organic solute transporters .
Nociceptive sensitization by the secretory protein Bv8.
1 The small protein Bv8 , isolated from amphibian skin , belongs to a novel family of secretory proteins ( Bv8-Prokineticin family , SWISS-PROT : Q9PW66 ) whose orthologues have been conserved throughout evolution , from invertebrates to humans .
2 When injected intravenously or subcutaneously ( from 0.06 to 500 pmol kg ( -1 ) ) or intrathecally ( from 6 fmol to 250 pmol ) in rats , Bv8 produced an intense systemic nociceptive sensitization to mechanical and thermal stimuli applied to the tail and paws .
3 Topically delivered into one rat paw , 50 fmol of Bv8 decreased by 50 % the nociceptive threshold to pressure in the injected paw without affecting the threshold in the contralateral paw .
4 The two G-protein coupled prokineticin receptors , PK-R1 and PK-R2 , were expressed in rat dorsal root ganglia ( DRG ) and in dorsal quadrants of spinal cord ( DSC ) and bound Bv8 and the mammalian orthologue , EG-VEGF , with high affinity .
In DSC , PK-R1 was more abundant than PK-R2 , whereas both receptors were equally expressed in DRG .
IC ( 50 ) of Bv8 and EG-VEGF to inhibit ( ( 125 ) I ) - Bv8 binding to rat DRG and DSC were 4.1 + \/ -0.4 nM Bv8 and 76.4 + \/ -7.6 nM EG-VEGF , in DRG ; 7.3 + \/ -0.9 nM Bv8 and 330 + \/ -41 nM EG-VEGF , in DSC .
5 In the small diameter neurons ( ( 30 microm ) of rat DRG cultures , Bv8 concentrations , ranging from 0.2 to 10 nM , raised ( Ca ( 2 + ) ) ( i ) in a dose-dependent manner .
6 These data suggest that Bv8 , through binding to PK receptors of DSC and primary sensitive neurons , results in intense sensitization of peripheral nociceptors to thermal and mechanical stimuli .
An RNF11: Smurf2 complex mediates ubiquitination of the AMSH protein.
RING-finger proteins play crucial roles in ubiquitination events involved in diverse cellular processes including signal transduction , differentiation and apoptosis .
Most of the RING-finger proteins have E3-ubiquitin ligase activity .
RNF11 is a small RING-finger protein and harbors a RING-H2 domain and a PY motif that could facilitate protein : protein interaction ( s ) involved in oncogenesis .
To isolate RNF11 protein partners and determine its role in normal and cancer cells , we performed yeast two-hybrid screening .
Among 18 in-frame positive clones , three were found to be ZBRK1 , Eps15 and AMSH ( associated molecule with the SH3 domain of STAM ) .
ZBRK1 is a KRAB domain containing Zinc-finger protein and is known to repress target gene transcription in a BRCA1-dependent manner .
Eps15 is monoubiquitinated and is part of an essential complex involved in the endocytosis of plasma membrane receptors via the clathrin-mediated internalization pathway .
Recent studies have shown that AMSH protein is involved in BMP\/TGF-beta signaling pathway by binding to Smad6 and Smad7 .
The association of RNF11 with these binding partners suggests that it would be involved in biological processes such as gene transcription , BMP\/TGF-beta signaling and ubiquitination-associated events .
Previously , we have shown that RNF11 interacts with the HECT-type E3 ligases AIP4 and Smurf2 .
Here , we show that RNF11 binds to AMSH in mammalian cells and that this interaction is independent of the RNF11 RING-finger domain and the PY motif .
Our results also demonstrate that AMSH is ubiquitinated by Smurf2 E3 ligase in the presence of RNF11 and that a consequent reduction in its steady-state level requires both RNF11 and Smurf2 .
RNF11 therefore recruits AMSH to Smurf2 for ubiquitination , leading to its degradation by the 26S proteasome .
The potential functions of RNF11-mediated degradation of AMSH in breast cancer are discussed .
Mutations in the human alpha-tectorin gene cause autosomal dominant non-syndromic hearing impairment.
The tectorial membrane is an extracellular matrix of the inner ear that contacts the stereocilia bundles of specialized sensory hair cells .
Sound induces movement of these hair cells relative to the tectorial membrane , deflects the stereocilia , and leads to fluctuations in hair-cell membrane potential , transducing sound into electrical signals .
Alpha-tectorin is one of the major non-collagenous components of the tectorial membrane .
Recently , the gene encoding mouse alpha-tectorin ( Tecta ) was mapped to a region of mouse chromosome 9 , which shows evolutionary conservation with human chromosome 11q ( ref .
3 ) , where linkage was found in two families , one Belgian ( DFNA12 ; ref .
4 ) and the other , Austrian ( DFNA8 ; unpublished data ) , with autosomal dominant non-syndromic hearing impairment .
We determined the complete sequence and the intron-exon structure of the human TECTA gene .
In both families , mutation analysis revealed missense mutations which replace conserved amino-acid residues within the zona pellucida domain of TECTA .
These findings indicate that mutations in TECTA are responsible for hearing impairment in these families , and implicate a new type of protein in the pathogenesis of hearing impairment .
Molecular cloning and characterization of DEFCAP-L and -S, two isoforms of a novel member of the mammalian Ced-4 family of apoptosis proteins.
We report the deduced amino acid sequences of two alternately spliced isoforms , designated DEFCAP-L and - S , that differ in 44 amino acids and encode a novel member of the mammalian Ced-4 family of apoptosis proteins .
Similar to the other mammalian Ced-4 proteins ( Apaf-1 and Nod1 ) , DEFCAP contains a caspase recruitment domain ( CARD ) and a putative nucleotide binding domain , signified by a consensus Walker 's A box ( P-loop ) and B box ( Mg ( 2 + ) - binding site ) .
Like Nod1 , but different from Apaf-1 , DEFCAP contains a putative regulatory domain containing multiple leucine-rich repeats ( LRR ) .
However , a distinguishing feature of the primary sequence of DEFCAP is that DEFCAP contains at its NH ( 2 ) terminus a pyrin-like motif and a proline-rich sequence , possibly involved in protein-protein interactions with Src homology domain 3-containing proteins .
By using in vitro coimmunoprecipitation experiments , both long and short isoforms were capable of strongly interacting with caspase-2 and exhibited a weaker interaction with caspase-9 .
Transient overexpression of full-length DEFCAP-L , but not DEFCAP-S , in breast adenocarcinoma cells MCF7 resulted in significant levels of apoptosis .
In vitro death assays with transient overexpression of deletion constructs of both isoforms using beta-galactosidase as a reporter gene in MCF7 cells suggest the following : 1 ) the nucleotide binding domain may act as a negative regulator of the killing activity of DEFCAP ; 2 ) the LRR\/CARD represents a putative constitutively active inducer of apoptosis ; 3 ) the killing activity of LRR\/CARD is inhibitable by benzyloxycarbonyl-Val-Ala-Asp ( OMe ) - fluoromethyl ketone and to a lesser extent by Asp-Glu-Val-Asp ( OMe ) - fluoromethyl ketone ; and 4 ) the CARD is critical for killing activity of DEFCAP .
These results suggest that DEFCAP is a novel member of the mammalian Ced-4 family of proteins capable of inducing apoptosis , and understanding its regulation may elucidate the complex nature of the mammalian apoptosis-promoting machinery .
Identification of four novel human G protein-coupled receptors expressed in the brain.
We report the discovery and tissue distributions of four novel human genes , GPR61 , GPR62 , GPR63 and GPR77 , all of which encode G protein-coupled receptors ( GPCRs ) .
GPR61 was discovered in a search of the patent literature which retrieved a rabbit DNA sequence partially encoding a novel GPCR .
This sequence was used to obtain a full-length human cDNA encoding GPR61 , a receptor of 417 amino acid length .
A search of the GenBank genomic sequence databases revealed three previously unrecognized intronless genes encoding the orphan GPCrs ( oGPCRs ) GPR62 , GPR63 and GPR77 , with respective amino acid lengths of 368 , 419 and 337 .
Sequence analysis revealed that GPR61 and GPR62 , and a published orphan receptor p47MNR , shared the highest level of identities to each other , ranging from 36 to 45 % in the transmembrane ( TM ) domains .
Together , these three oGPCRs appear to comprise a novel subfamily of GPCRs , most closely related to the serotonin 5-HT ( 6 ) receptor .
Sequence analysis of GPR63 and GPR77 revealed highest sequence identities in the TM regions with the oGPCR PSP24 ( 58 % ) and the anaphylatoxin C5a receptor ( 49 % ) respectively .
Tissue distribution analyses detected the expression of all four novel genes in the human brain .
GPR61 mRNA expression was detected in the caudate , putamen and thalamus of human brain , with a more widespread expression pattern in rat brain , with mRNA signals in areas of the cortex , hippocampus , thalamus , hypothalamus and midbrain .
GPR62 mRNA expression was detected in the basal forebrain , frontal cortex , caudate , putamen , thalamus and hippocampus .
GPR63 mRNA expression was detected in the frontal cortex , with lower levels in the thalamus , caudate , hypothalamus and midbrain .
Analysis of GPR77 mRNA expression revealed signals in the frontal cortex , hippocampus and hypothalamus with high transcript levels in the liver .
Molecular cloning of a T cell-specific adapter protein (TSAd) containing an Src homology (SH) 2 domain and putative SH3 and phosphotyrosine binding sites.
Adapter proteins link catalytic signaling proteins to cell surface receptors or downstream effector proteins .
In this paper , we present the cDNA sequence F2771 , isolated from an activated CD8 + T cell cDNA library .
The F2771 cDNA encodes a novel putative adapter protein .
The predicted amino acid sequence includes an SH2 domain as well as putative SH3 and phosphotyrosine binding interaction motifs , but lacks any known catalytic domains .
The expression of the gene is limited to tissues of the immune system and , in particular , activated T cells .
The protein expressed by F2771 cDNA in transfected COS cells is localized in the cytoplasm .
A polyclonal antiserum raised against an F2771-encoded peptide reacts with a tyrosine-phosphorylated 52-kDa protein expressed in phytohemagglutinin-stimulated peripheral blood mononuclear cells .
The gene is localized to chromosome 1q21 , a region often found to be aberrant in lymphomas .
The T cell-specific expression and the rapid induction of mRNA expression upon receptor binding , as well as the lack of catalytic domains in the presence of protein interaction domains , indicate that the F2771 gene encodes a novel T cell-specific adapter protein ( TSAd ) involved in the control of T cell activation .
TIF1gamma, a novel member of the transcriptional intermediary factor 1 family.
We report the cloning and characterization of a novel member of the Transcriptional Intermediary Factor 1 ( TIF1 ) gene family , human TIF1gamma .
Similar to TIF1alpha and TIF1beta , the structure of TIF1beta is characterized by multiple domains : RING finger , B boxes , Coiled coil , PHD\/TTC , and bromodomain .
Although structurally related to TIF1alpha and TIF1beta , TIF1gamma presents several functional differences .
In contrast to TIF1alpha , but like TIF1beta , TIF1 does not interact with nuclear receptors in yeast two-hybrid or GST pull-down assays and does not interfere with retinoic acid response in transfected mammalian cells .
Whereas TIF1alpha and TIF1beta were previously found to interact with the KRAB silencing domain of KOX1 and with the HP1alpha , MODI ( HP1beta ) and MOD2 ( HP1gamma ) heterochromatinic proteins , suggesting that they may participate in a complex involved in heterochromatin-induced gene repression , TIF1gamma does not interact with either the KRAB domain of KOX1 or the HP1 proteins .
Nevertheless , TIF1gamma , like TIF1alpha and TIF1beta , exhibits a strong silencing activity when tethered to a promoter .
Since deletion of a novel motif unique to the three TIF1 proteins , called TIF1 signature sequence ( TSS ) , abrogates transcriptional repression by TIF1gamma , this motif likely participates in TIF1 dependent repression .
Human orthologs of yeast vacuolar protein sorting proteins Vps26, 29, and 35: assembly into multimeric complexes.
Sorting nexin ( SNX ) 1 and SNX2 are mammalian orthologs of Vps5p , a yeast protein that is a subunit of a large multimeric complex , termed the retromer complex , involved in retrograde transport of proteins from endosomes to the trans-Golgi network .
We report the cloning and characterization of human orthologs of three additional components of the complex : Vps26p , Vps29p , and Vps35p .
The close structural similarity between the yeast and human proteins suggests a similarity in function .
We used both yeast two-hybrid assays and expression in mammalian cells to define the binding interactions among these proteins .
The data suggest a model in which hVps35 serves as the core of a multimeric complex by binding directly to hVps26 , hVps29 , and SNX1 .
Deletional analyses of hVps35 demonstrate that amino acid residues 1-53 and 307-796 of hVps35 bind to the coiled coil-containing domain of SNX1 .
In contrast , hVps26 binds to amino acid residues 1-172 of hVps35 , whereas hVps29 binds to amino acid residues 307-796 of hVps35 .
Furthermore , hVps35 , hVps29 , and hVps26 have been found in membrane-associated and cytosolic compartments .
Gel filtration chromatography of COS7 cell cytosol showed that both recombinant and endogenous hVps35 , hVps29 , and hVps26 coelute as a large complex ( approximately 220-440 kDa ) .
In the absence of hVps35 , neither hVps26 nor hVps29 is found in the large complex .
These data provide the first insights into the binding interactions among subunits of a putative mammalian retromer complex .
Comparative structural and functional analysis of the olfactory receptor genes flanking the human and mouse beta-globin gene clusters.
By sequencing regions flanking the beta-globin gene complex in mouse ( Hbbc ) and human ( HBBC ) , we have shown that the beta-globin gene cluster is surrounded by a larger cluster of olfactory receptor genes ( ORGs ) .
To facilitate sequence comparisons and to investigate the regulation of ORG expression , we have mapped 5 ' sequences of mRNA from olfactory epithelium encoding beta-globin-proximal ORGs .
We have found that several of these genes contain multiple noncoding exons that can be alternatively spliced .
Surprisingly , the only common motifs found in the promoters of these genes are a '' TATA '' box and a purine-rich motif .
Sequence comparisons between human and mouse reveal that most of the conserved regions are confined to the coding regions and transcription units of the genes themselves , but a few blocks of conserved sequence also are found outside of ORG transcription units .
The possible influence of beta-globin regulatory sequences on ORG expression in olfactory epithelium was tested in mice containing a deletion of the endogenous beta-globin locus control region , but no change in expression of the neighboring ORGs was detected .
We evaluate the implications of these results for possible mechanisms of regulation of ORG transcription .
Discovery of three novel G-protein-coupled receptor genes.
We report here the molecular cloning , tissue distribution , and chromosomal localization of novel genes encoding G-protein-coupled receptors ( GPCRs ) .
A search of a mouse database of expressed sequence tags revealed an EST partially encoding a GPCR , which was used to screen a mouse genomic library to obtain the translational open reading frame ( ORF ) .
The resultant clone , GPR27 , contained an intronless ORF , encoding a receptor of 379 amino acids .
In an alternate strategy , human genomic DNA was subjected to polymerase chain reaction ( PCR ) amplification , using degenerate oligonucleotides based on GPR1 .
Two PCR products partially encoding GPCRs were isolated and used to screen a genomic library to obtain the translational ORF .
One of the resultant clones , GPR30 , contained an intronless ORF encoding a receptor of 375 amino acids .
The other clone , GPR35 , also contained an intronless ORF encoding a receptor of 309 amino acids .
Transcripts corresponding to GPR27 and GPR30 were detected in several areas of human and rat CNS , While GPR35 expression was detected only in the rat intestine .
Through fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis the gene encoding GPR30 was localized to chromosome 7p22 and GPR35 to chromosome 2q37 .3 .
Chromosome instability and immunodeficiency syndrome caused by mutations in a DNA methyltransferase gene.
The recessive autosomal disorder known as ICF syndrome ( for immunodeficiency , centromere instability and facial anomalies ; Mendelian Inheritance in Man number 242860 ) is characterized by variable reductions in serum immunoglobulin levels which cause most ICF patients to succumb to infectious diseases before adulthood .
Mild facial anomalies include hypertelorism , low-set ears , epicanthal folds and macroglossia .
The cytogenetic abnormalities in lymphocytes are exuberant : juxtacentromeric heterochromatin is greatly elongated and thread-like in metaphase chromosomes , which is associated with the formation of complex multiradiate chromosomes .
The same juxtacentromeric regions are subject to persistent interphase self-associations and are extruded into nuclear blebs or micronuclei .
Abnormalities are largely confined to tracts of classical satellites 2 and 3 at juxtacentromeric regions of chromosomes 1 , 9 and 16 .
Classical satellite DNA is normally heavily methylated at cytosine residues , but in ICF syndrome it is almost completely unmethylated in all tissues .
ICF syndrome is the only genetic disorder known to involve constitutive abnormalities of genomic methylation patterns .
Here we show that five unrelated ICF patients have mutations in both alleles of the gene that encodes DNA methyltransferase 3B ( refs 5 , 6 ) .
Cytosine methylation is essential for the organization and stabilization of a specific type of heterochromatin , and this methylation appears to be carried out by an enzyme specialized for the purpose .
A family of stress-inducible GADD45-like proteins mediate activation of the stress-responsive MTK1/MEKK4 MAPKKK.
The stress-responsive p38 and JNK MAPK pathways regulate cell cycle and apoptosis .
A human MAPKKK , MTK1 ( = MEKK4 ) , mediates activation of both p38 and JNK in response to environmental stresses .
Using a yeast two-hybrid method , three related proteins , GADD45alpha ( = GADD45 ) , GADD45 , ( = MyD118 ) , and GADD45gamma , were identified that bound to an N-terminal domain of MTK1 .
These proteins activated MTK1 kinase activity , both in vivo and in vitro .
The GADD45-like genes are induced by environmental stresses , including MMS , UV , and gamma irradiation .
Expression of the GADD45-like genes induces p38\/JNK activation and apoptosis , which can be partially suppressed by coexpression of a dominant inhibitory MTK1 mutant protein .
We propose that the GADD45-like proteins mediate activation of the p38\/JNK pathway , via MTK1 \/ MEKK4 , in response to environmental stresses .
Inhibition of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase activation attenuates beta-lapachone-induced necrotic cell death in human osteosarcoma cells.
beta-Lapachone , a novel anticancer drug , induces various human carcinoma cells to undergo apoptotic cell death .
However , we report here that , in human osteocarcinoma ( U2-OS ) cells , beta-lapachone induces necrosis rather than apoptosis .
beta-Lapachone-induced necrotic cell death in U2-OS cells was characterized by propidium iodide uptake , cytochrome c release , a decreased mitochondrial membrane potential , and ATP depletion .
The mitochondrial potential transition ( MPT ) , including the reduction of the mitochondrial transmembrane potential and the release of mitochondrial cytochrome c , occurred in beta-lapachone-treated cells ; cotreatment of these cells with cyclosporin A , an inhibitor of MPT pore , failed to prevent necrotic cell death .
This indicates that the MPT transition does not play a crucial role in this process .
Furthermore , beta-lapachone-induced necrosis was independent of oxidative stress and caspase activation .
However , excessive poly ( ADP-ribose ) polymerase ( PARP ) activation and subsequent depletion of intracellular NAD ( + ) and ATP were seen in beta-lapachone-treated U2-OS cells .
Cotreatment with a PARP inhibitor , 3-aminobenzamide , decreased beta-lapachone-induced PARP activation and provided significant protection from necrosis by preventing depletion of intracellular NAD ( + ) and ATP .
Taken together , our results suggest that PARP plays an important role in the signaling pathway for beta-lapachone-induced necrosis in U2-OS cells .
WBSCR14, a gene mapping to the Williams--Beuren syndrome deleted region, is a new member of the Mlx transcription factor network.
Williams-Beuren syndrome ( WBS ) is a developmental disorder associated with haploinsufficiency of multiple genes at 7q11 .23 .
Here , we report the functional characterization of WBS critical region gene 14 ( WBSCR14 ) , a gene contained in the WBS commonly deleted region .
It encodes a basic-helix -- loop -- helix leucine zipper ( bHLHZip ) transcription factor of the Myc\/Max\/Mad superfamily .
WBSCR14 is expressed in multiple tissues , including regions of the brain and the intestinal tract .
WBSCR14 forms heterodimers with the bHLHZip protein Mlx to bind the DNA sequence CACGTG .
Like Max , Mlx has no intrinsic transcriptional activity , but its association with Mad1 , Mad4 , Mnt or WBSCR14 can repress E-box-dependent transcription .
Preliminary results suggest a possible role of WBSCR14 in growth control .
Our data support the view that the Max-like bHLHZip protein , Mlx , is a key element of a transcription factor network .
We thus suggest that WBSCR14 may contribute to some aspects of the WBS pathology .
Two-amino acid molecular switch in an epithelial morphogen that regulates binding to two distinct receptors.
Ectodysplasin , a member of the tumor necrosis factor family , is encoded by the anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia ( EDA ) gene .
Mutations in EDA give rise to a clinical syndrome characterized by loss of hair , sweat glands , and teeth .
EDA-A1 and EDA-A2 are two isoforms of ectodysplasin that differ only by an insertion of two amino acids .
This insertion functions to determine receptor binding specificity , such that EDA-A1 binds only the receptor EDAR , whereas EDA-A2 binds only the related , but distinct , X-linked ectodysplasin-A2 receptor ( XEDAR ) .
In situ binding and organ culture studies indicate that EDA-A1 and EDA-A2 are differentially expressed and play a role in epidermal morphogenesis .
Mutations in PROP1 cause familial combined pituitary hormone deficiency.
Combined pituitary hormone deficiency ( CPHD ) in man denotes impaired production of growth hormone ( GH ) and one or more of the other five anterior pituitary hormones .
Mutations of the pituitary transcription factor gene POU1F1 ( the human homolog of mouse Pit1 ) are responsible for deficiencies of GH , prolactin and thyroid stimulating hormone ( TSH ) in Snell and Jackson dwarf mice and in man , while the production of adrenocorticotrophic hormone ( ACTH ) , luteinizing hormone ( LH ) and follicle stimulating hormone ( FSH ) is preserved .
The Ames dwarf ( df ) mouse displays a similar phenotype , and appears to be epistatic to Snell and Jackson dwarfism .
We have recently positionally cloned the putative Ames dwarf gene Prop1 , which encodes a paired-like homeodomain protein that is expressed specifically in embryonic pituitary and is necessary for Pit1 expression .
In this report , we have identified four CPHD families with homozygosity or compound heterozygosity for inactivating mutations of PROP1 .
These mutations in the human PROP1 gene result in a gene product with reduced DNA-binding and transcriptional activation ability in comparison to the product of the murine df mutation .
In contrast to individuals with POU1F1 mutations , those with PROP1 mutations can not produce LH and FSH at a sufficient level and do not enter puberty spontaneously .
Our results identify a major cause of CPHD in humans and suggest a direct or indirect role for PROP1 in the ontogenesis of pituitary gonadotropes , as well as somatotropes , lactotropes and caudomedial thyrotropes .
FANCE: the link between Fanconi anaemia complex assembly and activity.
The Fanconi anemia ( FA ) nuclear complex ( composed of the FA proteins A , C , G and F ) is essential for protection against chromosome breakage .
It activates the downstream protein FANCD2 by monoubiquitylation ; this then forges an association with the BRCA1 protein at sites of DNA damage .
Here we show that the recently identified FANCE protein is part of this nuclear complex , binding both FANCC and FANCD2 .
Indeed , FANCE is required for the nuclear accumulation of FANCC and provides a critical bridge between the FA complex and FANCD2 .
Disease-associated FANCC mutants do not bind to FANCE , can not accumulate in the nucleus and are unable to prevent chromosome breakage .
HIPK2 neutralizes MDM2 inhibition rescuing p53 transcriptional activity and apoptotic function.
The p53 oncosuppressor protein is subject to negative regulation by MDM2 , which efficiently inhibits its activity through an autoregulatory loop .
In response to stress , however , p53 undergoes post-translational modifications that allow the protein to escape MDM2 control , accumulate , and become active .
Recent studies have shown that , following DNA damage , the HIPK2 serine\/threonine kinase binds and phosphorylates p53 , inducing p53 transcriptional activity and apoptotic function .
Here , we investigated the role of HIPK2 in the activation of p53 in the presence of MDM2 .
We found that HIPK2 rescues p53 transcriptional activity overcoming MDM2 inhibition , and that restoration of this p53 function induces apoptosis .
Recovery of p53-dependent apoptosis is achieved by preventing p53 nuclear export and ubiquitination mediated by MDM2 in vitro and in vivo following genotoxic stress .
These results shed new light on the mechanisms by which the HIPK2\/p53 pathway promotes apoptosis and suppression of tumorigenesis .
Organization and evolution of olfactory receptor genes on human chromosome 11.
Olfactory receptors ( OR ) are encoded by a large multigene family including hundreds of members dispersed throughout the human genome .
Cloning and mapping studies have determined that a large proportion of the olfactory receptor genes are located on human chromosomes 6 , 11 , and 17 , as well as distributed on other chromosomes .
In this paper , we describe and characterize the organization of olfactory receptor genes on human chromosome 11 by using degenerate PCR-based probes to screen chromosome 11-specific and whole genome clone libraries for members of the OR gene family .
OR genes were identified by DNA sequencing and then localized to regions of chromosome 11 .
Physical maps of several gene clusters were constructed to determine the chromosomal relationships between various members of the family .
This work identified 25 new OR genes located on chromosome 11 in at least seven distinct regions .
Three of these regions contain gene clusters that include additional members of this gene family not yet identified by sequencing .
Phylogenetic analysis of the newly described OR genes suggests a mechanism for the generation of genetic diversity .
Interaction of polyadenylate-binding protein with the eIF4G homologue PAIP enhances translation.
In the initiation of translation in eukaryotes , binding of the small ribosomal subunit to the messenger RNA results from recognition of the 5 ' cap structure ( m7GpppX ) of the mRNA by the cap-binding complex eIF4F .
eIF4F is itself a three-subunit complex comprising the cap-binding protein eIF4E , eIF4A , an ATP-dependent RNA helicase , and eIF4G , which interacts with both eIF4A and eIF4E and enhances cap binding by eIF4E .
The mRNA 3 ' polyadenylate tail and the associated poly ( A ) - binding protein ( PABP ) also regulate translational initiation , probably by interacting with the 5 ' end of the mRNA .
In yeast and plants , PABP interacts with eIF4G but no such interaction has been reported in mammalian cells .
Here , we describe a new human PABP-interacting protein , PAIP-I , whose sequence is similar to the central portion of eIF4G and which interacts with eIF4A .
Overexpression of PAIP-1 in COS-7 cells stimulates translation , perhaps by providing a physical link between the mRNA termini .
p73 and p63 are homotetramers capable of weak heterotypic interactions with each other but not with p53.
Mutations in the p53 tumor suppressor gene are the most frequent genetic alterations found in human cancers .
Recent identification of two human homologs of p53 has raised the prospect of functional interactions between family members via a conserved oligomerization domain .
Here we report in vitro and in vivo analysis of homo - and hetero-oligomerization of p53 and its homologs , p63 and p73 .
The oligomerization domains of p63 and p73 can independently fold into stable homotetramers , as previously observed for p53 .
However , the oligomerization domain of p53 does not associate with that of either p73 or p63 , even when p53 is in 15-fold excess .
On the other hand , the oligomerization domains of p63 and p73 are able to weakly associate with one another in vitro .
In vivo co-transfection assays of the ability of p53 and its homologs to activate reporter genes showed that a DNA-binding mutant of p53 was not able to act in a dominant negative manner over wild-type p73 or p63 but that a p73 mutant could inhibit the activity of wild-type p63 .
These data suggest that mutant p53 in cancer cells will not interact with endogenous or exogenous p63 or p73 via their respective oligomerization domains .
It also establishes that the multiple isoforms of p63 as well as those of p73 are capable of interacting via their common oligomerization domain .
Molecular cloning and characterization of the human protein kinase D2. A novel member of the protein kinase D family of serine threonine kinases.
We have isolated the full-length cDNA of a novel human serine threonine protein kinase gene .
The deduced protein sequence contains two cysteine-rich motifs at the N terminus , a pleckstrin homology domain , and a catalytic domain containing all the characteristic sequence motifs of serine protein kinases .
It exhibits the strongest homology to the serine threonine protein kinases PKD\/PKCmicro and PKCnu , particularly in the duplex zinc finger-like cysteine-rich motif , in the pleckstrin homology domain and in the protein kinase domain .
In contrast , it shows only a low degree of sequence similarity to other members of the PKC family .
Therefore , the new protein has been termed protein kinase D2 ( PKD2 ) .
The mRNA of PKD2 is widely expressed in human and murine tissues .
It encodes a protein with a molecular mass of 105 kDa in SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis , which is expressed in various human cell lines , including HL60 cells , which do not express PKCmicro .
In vivo phorbol ester binding studies demonstrated a concentration-dependent binding of ( ( 3 ) H ) phorbol 12,13-dibutyrate to PKD2 .
The addition of phorbol 12,13-dibutyrate in the presence of dioleoylphosphatidylserine stimulated the autophosphorylation of PKD2 in a synergistic fashion .
Phorbol esters also stimulated autophosphorylation of PKD2 in intact cells .
PKD2 activated by phorbol esters efficiently phosphorylated the exogenous substrate histone H1 .
In addition , we could identify the C-terminal Ser ( 876 ) residue as an in vivo phosphorylation site within PKD2 .
Phosphorylation of Ser ( 876 ) of PKD2 correlated with the activation status of the kinase .
Finally , gastrin was found to be a physiological activator of PKD2 in human AGS-B cells stably transfected with the CCK ( B ) \/ gastrin receptor .
Thus , PKD2 is a novel phorbol ester - and growth factor-stimulated protein kinase .
Comparative analysis of a novel gene from the Wolf-Hirschhorn/Pitt-Rogers-Danks syndrome critical region.
Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome ( WHS ) is a multiple malformation syndrome characterized by mental and developmental defects resulting from the absence of a segment of one chromosome 4 short arm ( 4p16 .3 ) .
Recently , Pitt-Rogers-Danks syndrome ( PRDS ) , which is also due to a deletion of chromosome 4p16 .3 , has been shown to be allelic to WHS .
Due to the complex and variable expression of these disorders , it is thought that WHS\/PRDS results from a segmental aneusomy of 4p resulting in haploinsufficieny of an undefined number of genes that contribute to the phenotype .
In an effort to identify genes that contribute to human development and whose absence may contribute to the phenotype associated with these syndromes , we have generated a transcript map of the 165-kb critical region and have identified a number of potential genes .
One of these genes , WHSC2 , which was identified with the IMAGE cDNA clone 53283 , has been characterized .
Sequence analysis defined an open reading frame of 1584 bp ( 528 amino acids ) , and transcript analysis detected a 2.4-kb transcript in all fetal and adult tissues tested .
In parallel , the mouse homolog was isolated and characterized .
Mouse sequence analysis and the pattern of expression are consistent with the clone being the murine equivalent of the human WHSC2 gene ( designated Whsc2h ) .
The data from sequence and transcript analysis of this new human gene in combination with the lack of significant similarity to proteins of known function imply that it represents a novel gene .
Most importantly , its location within the WHSCR suggests that this gene may play a role in the phenotype of the Wolf-Hirschhorn\/Pitt-Rogers-Danks syndrome .
Human serine racemase: moleular cloning, genomic organization and functional analysis.
High levels of D-serine are found in mammalian brain , where it is an endogenous agonist of the strichinine-insensitive site of N-methyl D-aspartate type of glutamate receptors .
D-serine is enriched in protoplasmic astrocytes that occur in gray matter areas of the brain and was shown to be synthesized from L-serine .
We now report cloning and expression of human serine racemase , an enzyme that catalyses the synthesis of D-serine from L-serine .
The enzyme displays a high homology to the murine serine racemase .
It contains a pyridoxal 5 ' - phosphate attachment sequence similar to bacterial biosynthetic threonine dehydratase .
Northern-blot analysis show high levels of human serine racemase in areas known to contain large amounts of endogenous D-serine , such as hippocampus and corpus callosum .
Robust synthesis of D-serine was detected in cells transfected with human serine racemase , demonstrating the conservation of D-amino acid metabolism in humans .
Serine racemase may be a therapeutic target in psychiatric diseases as supplementation of D-serine greatly improves schizophrenia symptoms .
We identify the human serine racemase genomic structure and show that the gene encompasses seven exons and localizes to chromosome 17q13 .3 .
Identification of the intron-exon boundaries of the human serine racemase gene will be useful to search for mutations in neuropsychiatric disorders .
Identification and characterization of Gemin7, a novel component of the survival of motor neuron complex.
The survival of motor neurons ( SMN ) protein is the product of the gene mutated or deleted in the neurodegenerative disease , spinal muscular atrophy .
SMN is part of a large macromolecular complex that also contains Gemin2 , Gemin3 , Gemin4 , Gemin5 , and Gemin6 .
The SMN complex functions in the assembly of spliceosomal small nuclear ribonucleoproteins and probably other ribonucleoprotein particles .
We have identified a novel protein component of the SMN complex termed Gemin7 using native purified SMN complexes and peptide sequencing by mass spectrometry .
Coimmunoprecipitation and immunolocalization experiments demonstrate that Gemin7 is a component of the SMN complex and colocalizes with SMN in the cytoplasm and in gems .
Binding experiments show that Gemin7 interacts directly with SMN and Gemin6 and mediates the association of Gemin6 with the SMN complex .
The amino acid sequence of Gemin7 does not contain any recognizable motifs with the exception of several arginine and glycine repeats that are necessary for its interaction with SMN .
Moreover , Gemin7 interacts with several Sm proteins of spliceosomal small nuclear ribonucleoproteins , in particular , with SmE .
With the identification of Gemin7 , the inventory of the core components of the SMN complex appears essentially complete .
A novel gene, MEL1, mapped to 1p36.3 is highly homologous to the MDS1/EVI1 gene and is transcriptionally activated in t(1;3)(p36;q21)-positive leukemia cells.
The reciprocal translocation t ( 1 ; 3 ) ( p36 ; q21 ) occurs in a subset of myelodysplastic syndrome ( MDS ) and acute myeloid leukemia ( AML ) , which is frequently characterized by trilineage dysplasia , in particular dysmegakaryocytopoiesis , and poor prognosis .
Previously , the breakpoint cluster region ( BCR ) at 3q21 was identified within a 60-kilobase ( kb ) region centromeric to the BCR of 3q21q26 syndrome and that at 1p36 .3 within a 90-kb region .
In this study , genes were searched near the breakpoints at 1p36 .3 , and a novel gene was isolated that encoded a zinc finger protein with a PR domain , which is highly homologous to the MDS1\/EVI1 gene .
The novel gene , designated as MEL1 ( MDS1\/EVI1-like gene 1 ) , with 1257 amino acid residues is 64 % similar in nucleotide and 63 % similar in amino acid sequences to MDS1\/EVI1 with the same domain structure .
The MEL1 gene is expressed in leukemia cells with t ( 1 ; 3 ) but not in other cell lines or bone marrow , spleen , and fetal liver , suggesting that MEL1 is specifically in the t ( 1 ; 3 ) ( p36 ; q21 ) - positive MDS\/AML .
On the basis of the positional relationship between the EVI1 and MEL1 genes in each translocation , it was suggested that both genes are transcriptionally activated by the translocation of the 3q21 region with the Ribophorin I gene .
Because of the transcriptional activation of the EVI1 family genes in both t ( 1 ; 3 ) ( p36 ; q21 ) - positive MDS\/AML and 3q21q26 syndrome , it is suggested that they share a common molecular mechanism for the leukemogenic transformation of the cells .
Extensive repertoire of membrane-bound and soluble dendritic cell-specific ICAM-3-grabbing nonintegrin 1 (DC-SIGN1) and DC-SIGN2 isoforms. Inter-individual variation in expression of DC-SIGN transcripts.
Expression in dendritic cells ( DCs ) of DC-SIGN , a type II membrane protein with a C-type lectin ectodomain , is thought to play an important role in establishing the initial contact between DCs and resting T cells .
DC-SIGN is also a unique type of human immunodeficiency virus-1 ( HIV-1 ) attachment factor and promotes efficient infection in trans of cells that express CD4 and chemokine receptors .
We have identified another gene , designated here as DC-SIGN2 , that exhibits high sequence homology with DC-SIGN .
Here we demonstrate that alternative splicing of DC-SIGN1 ( original version ) and DC-SIGN2 pre-mRNA generates a large repertoire of DC-SIGN-like transcripts that are predicted to encode membrane-associated and soluble isoforms .
The range of DC-SIGN1 mRNA expression was significantly broader than previously reported and included THP-1 monocytic cells , placenta , and peripheral blood mononuclear cells ( PBMCs ) , and there was cell maturation\/activation-induced differences in mRNA expression levels .
Immunostaining of term placenta with a DC-SIGN1-specific antiserum showed that DC-SIGN1 is expressed on endothelial cells and CC chemokine receptor 5 ( CCR5 ) - positive macrophage-like cells in the villi .
DC-SIGN2 mRNA expression was high in the placenta and not detectable in PBMCs .
In DCs , the expression of DC-SIGN2 transcripts was significantly lower than that of DC-SIGN1 .
Notably , there was significant inter-individual heterogeneity in the repertoire of DC-SIGN1 and DC-SIGN2 transcripts expressed .
The genes for DC-SIGN1 , DC-SIGN2 , and CD23 , another Type II lectin , colocalize to an approximately 85 kilobase pair region on chromosome 19p13 .3 , forming a cluster of related genes that undergo highly complex alternative splicing events .
The molecular diversity of DC-SIGN-1 and -2 is reminiscent of that observed for certain other adhesive cell surface proteins involved in cell-cell connectivity .
The generation of this large collection of polymorphic cell surface and soluble variants that exhibit inter-individual variation in expression levels has important implications for the pathogenesis of HIV-1 infection , as well as for the molecular code required to establish complex interactions between antigen-presenting cells and T cells , i.e. the immunological synapse .
Human interleukin-10-related T cell-derived inducible factor: molecular cloning and functional characterization as an hepatocyte-stimulating factor.
IL-10-related T cell-derived inducible factor ( IL-TIF or IL-21 ) is a new cytokine structurally related to IL-10 and originally identified in the mouse as a gene induced by IL-9 in T cells and mast cells .
Here , we report the cloning of the human IL-TIF cDNA , which shares 79 % amino acid identity with mouse IL-TIF and 25 % identity with human IL-10 .
Recombinant human IL-TIF was found to activate signal transducer and activator of transcription factors-1 and -3 in several hepatoma cell lines .
IL-TIF stimulation of HepG2 human hepatoma cells up-regulated the production of acute phase reactants such as serum amyloid A , alpha1-antichymotrypsin , and haptoglobin .
Although IL-10 and IL-TIF have distinct activities , antibodies directed against the beta chain of the IL-10 receptor blocked the induction of acute phase reactants by IL-TIF , indicating that this chain is a common component of the IL-10 and IL-TIF receptors .
Similar acute phase reactant induction was observed in mouse liver upon IL-TIF injection , and IL-TIF expression was found to be rapidly increased after lipopolysaccharide ( LPS ) injection , suggesting that this cytokine contributes to the inflammatory response in vivo .
Aurora B -TACC1 protein complex in cytokinesis.
Taxins are a family of centrosomal proteins important for the regulation of mitosis and microtubule dynamics .
Cytokinesis , the last step of M phase , is essential for chromosomal integrity and cell division .
It is highly regulated and involves a reorganization of microtubules and actin filaments .
We show here that TACC1 localizes diffusely to the midzone spindle in anaphase and strongly to the midbody during cytokinesis , indicating a possible involvement of this protein in the exit of M phase .
TACC1 also relocalizes to the nucleolus in interphase .
We demonstrate that TACC1 and the mitotic kinase Aurora B belong to the same complex during cytokinesis .
We further show that Aurora B knocked down by RNA-mediated interference prevents the formation of the midbody - and consequently affects TACC1 localization at this site - and leads to abnormal cell division and multinucleated cells .
Regulation of Smad degradation and activity by Smurf2, an E3 ubiquitin ligase.
Smad proteins are key intracellular signaling effectors for the transforming growth factor-beta superfamily of peptide growth factors .
Following receptor-induced activation , Smads move into the nucleus to activate transcription of a select set of target genes .
The activity of Smad proteins must be tightly regulated to exert the biological effects of different ligands in a timely manner .
Here , we report the identification of Smurf2 , a new member of the Hect family of E3 ubiquitin ligases .
Smurf2 selectively interacts with receptor-regulated Smads and preferentially targets Smad1 for ubiquitination and proteasome-mediated degradation .
At higher expression levels , Smurf2 also decreases the protein levels of Smad2 , but not Smad3 .
In Xenopus embryos , ectopic Smurf2 expression specifically inhibits Smad1 responses and thereby affects embryonic patterning by bone morphogenetic protein signals .
These findings suggest that Smurf2 may regulate the competence of a cell to respond to transforming growth factor-beta\/bone morphogenetic protein signaling through a distinct degradation pathway that is similar to , yet independent of , Smurf1 .
Cloning of a novel gene (ING1L) homologous to ING1, a candidate tumor suppressor.
The ING1 gene encodes p33 ( ING1 ) , a putative tumor suppressor for neuroblastomas and breast cancers , which has been shown to cooperate with p53 in controlling cell proliferation .
We have isolated a novel human gene , ING1L , that potentially encodes a PHD-type zinc-finger protein highly homologous to p33 ( ING1 ) .
Fluorescence in situ hybridization and radiation-hybrid analyses assigned ING1L to human chromosome 4 .
Both ING1 and ING1L are expressed in a variety of human tissues , but we found ING1L expression to be significantly more pronounced in tumors from several colon-cancer patients than in normal colon tissues excised at the same surgical sites .
Although the significance of this observation with respect to carcinogenesis remains to be established , the data suggest that ING1L might be involved in colon cancers through interference with signal ( s ) transmitted through p53 and p33 ( ING1 ) .
Expression of CaT-like, a novel calcium-selective channel, correlates with the malignancy of prostate cancer.
The regulation of intracellular Ca ( 2 + ) plays a key role in the development and growth of cells .
Here we report the cloning and functional expression of a highly calcium-selective channel localized on the human chromosome 7 .
The sequence of the new channel is structurally related to the gene product of the CaT1 protein cloned from rat duodenum and is therefore called CaT-like ( CaT-L ) .
CaT-L is expressed in locally advanced prostate cancer , metastatic and androgen-insensitive prostatic lesions but is undetectable in healthy prostate tissue and benign prostatic hyperplasia .
Additionally , CaT-L is expressed in normal placenta , exocrine pancreas , and salivary glands .
New markers with well defined biological function that correlate with aberrant cell growth are needed for the molecular staging of cancer and to predict the clinical outcome .
The human CaT-L channel represents a marker for prostate cancer progression and may serve as a target for therapeutic strategies .
Golgi localization of carbohydrate sulfotransferases is a determinant of L-selectin ligand biosynthesis.
Sulfation of endothelial glycoproteins by the sulfotransferase GlcNAc6ST-2 is a regulatory modification that promotes binding of the leukocyte adhesion molecule L-selectin .
GlcNAc6ST-2 is a member of a family of related enzymes that act on similar carbohydrate substrates in vitro but discrete glycoproteins in vivo .
We demonstrate that GlcNAc6ST-1 , -2 , and -3 have distinct Golgi distributions , with GlcNAc6ST-1 confined to the trans-Golgi network , GlcNAc6ST-3 confined to the early secretory pathway , and GlcNAc6ST-2 distributed throughout the Golgi .
Their localization was correlated with preferred activity on either N-linked or O-linked glycoproteins .
A chimera comprising the localization domain of GlcNAc6ST-1 fused to the catalytic domain of GlcNAc6ST-2 was confined to the trans-Golgi network and adopted the substrate preference of GlcNAc6ST-1 .
We propose a model in which Golgi enzyme localization and competition orchestrate the biosynthesis of L-selectin ligands .
Cloning and expression of the histo-blood group Pk UDP-galactose: Ga1beta-4G1cbeta1-cer alpha1, 4-galactosyltransferase. Molecular genetic basis of the p phenotype.
The molecular genetic basis of the P histo-blood group system has eluded characterization despite extensive studies of the biosynthesis of the P ( 1 ) , P , and P ( k ) glycolipids .
The main controversy has been whether a single or two distinct UDP-Gal : Galbeta1-R 4-alpha-galactosyltransferases catalyze the syntheses of the structurally related P ( 1 ) and P ( k ) antigens .
The P ( 1 ) polymorphism is linked to 22q11.3-ter .
Data base searches with the coding region of an alpha4GlcNAc-transferase identified a novel homologous gene at 22q13 .2 designated alpha4Gal-T1 .
Expression of full coding constructs of alpha4Gal-T1 in insect cells revealed it encoded P ( k ) but not P ( 1 ) synthase activity .
Northern analysis showed expression of the transcript correlating with P ( k ) synthase activity and antigen expression in human B cell lines .
Transfection of P ( k ) - negative Namalwa cells with alpha4Gal-T1 resulted in strong P ( k ) expression .
A single homozygous missense mutation , M183K , was found in six Swedish individuals of the rare p phenotype , confirming that alpha4Gal-T1 represented the P ( k ) gene .
Sequence analysis of the coding region of alpha4Gal-T1 in P ( 1 ) + \/ - individuals did not reveal polymorphisms correlating with P ( 1 ) P ( 2 ) typing .
Human C1qRp is identical with CD93 and the mNI-11 antigen but does not bind C1q.
It has been suggested that the human C1qRp is a receptor for the complement component C1q ; however , there is no direct evidence for an interaction between C1q and C1qRp .
In this study , we demonstrate that C1q does not show enhanced binding to C1qRp-transfected cells compared with control cells .
Furthermore , a soluble recombinant C1qRp-Fc chimera failed to interact with immobilized C1q .
The proposed role of C1qRp in the phagocytic response in vivo is also unsupported in that we demonstrate that this molecule is not expressed by macrophages in a variety of human tissues and the predominant site of expression is on endothelial cells .
Studies on the rodent homolog of C1qRp , known as AA4 , have suggested that this molecule may function as an intercellular adhesion molecule .
Here we show that C1qRp is the Ag recognized by several previously described mAbs , mNI-11 and two anti-CD93 Abs ( clones X2 and VIMD2b ) .
Interestingly , mNI-11 ( Fab ' ) has been shown to promote monocyte-monocyte and monocyte-endothelial cell adhesive interactions .
We produced a recombinant C1qRp-Fc chimera containing the C-type lectin-like domain of C1qRp and found specific binding to vascular endothelial cells in sections of inflamed human tonsil , indicating the presence of a C1qRp ligand at this site .
This interaction was Ca ( 2 + ) independent and was not blocked by our anti-C1qRp mAb BIIG-4 , but was blocked by the proadhesive mAb mNI-11 .
Collectively , these data indicate that C1qRp is not a receptor for C1q , and they support the emerging role of C1qRp ( here renamed CD93 ) in functions relevant to intercellular adhesion .
The novel Rho-family GTPase rif regulates coordinated actin-based membrane rearrangements.
Small GTPases of the Rho family have a critical role in controlling cell morphology , motility and adhesion through dynamic regulation of the actin cytoskeleton ( 1,2 ) .
Individual Rho GTPases have been shown to regulate distinct components of the cytoskeletal architecture ; RhoA stimulates the bundling of actin filaments into stress fibers ( 3 ) , Rac reorganises actin to produce membrane sheets or lamellipodia ( 4 ) and Cdc42 causes the formation of thin , actin-rich surface projections called filopodia ( 5 ) .
We have isolated a new Rho-family GTPase , Rif ( Rho in filopodia ) , and shown that it represents an alternative signalling route to the generation of filopodial structures .
Coordinated regulation of Rho-family GTPases can be used to generate more complicated actin rearrangements , such as those underlying cell migration ( 6 ) .
In addition to inducing filopodia , Rif functions cooperatively with Cdc42 and Rac to generate additional structures , increasing the diversity of actin-based morphology .
cDNA cloning and chromosomal localization of the human and mouse isoforms of Ksp-cadherin.
Ksp-cadherin is a novel kidney-specific member of the cadherin superfamily of cell adhesion molecules .
We have determined the complete cDNA coding sequences of both the human and the mouse isoforms of Ksp-cadherin .
The inferred amino acid sequences of the human and mouse isoforms are 79 and 75 % identical to the originally described rabbit isoform of Ksp-cadherin ( Thomson et al. , 1995 ; J. Biol .
Chem .
270 , 17594-17601 ) , respectively .
The relative locations of cadherin-specific sequence motifs , putative N-glycosylation sites , and characteristic protein domains are entirely conserved in all three isoforms .
Multiple organ Northern analyses indicate that , as in the rabbit , both the human and the mouse Ksp-cadherin transcripts appear to have distinct kidney-specific distributions .
The human Ksp-cadherin gene ( CDH16 ) maps to chromosome 16q21-proximal 16q22 .
The mouse Ksp-cadherin gene ( Cdh16 ) was localized to a highly syntenic region of distal Chromosome 8 .
Both the human and the mouse Ksp-cadherin genes were localized to previously identified clusters of cadherin gene sequences , consistent with the hypothesis that most cadherin family members arose by gene duplication from a single ancestral gene at a relatively early stage in the evolution of the mammalian genome .
Uroplakin II gene is expressed in transitional cell carcinoma but not in bilharzial bladder squamous cell carcinoma: alternative pathways of bladder epithelial differentiation and tumor formation.
Uroplakins ( UPs ) are integral membrane proteins that are synthesized as the major differentiation products of mammalian urothelium .
We have cloned the human UP-II gene and localized it on chromosome 11q23 .
A survey of 50 transitional cell carcinomas ( TCCs ) revealed a UP-II polymorphism but no tumor-specific mutations .
Immunohistochemical staining using rabbit antisera against a synthetic peptide of UP-II and against total UPs showed UP reactivity in 39.5 % ( 17 of 43 cases ) of conventional TCCs , 12.8 % ( 5 of 39 ) of bilharzial-related TCCs , and 2.7 % ( 1 of 36 ) of bilharzial-related squamous cell carcinomas ( SCCs ) .
The finding that fewer bilharzial TCCs express UPs than conventional TCCs ( 12.8 versus 40 % ) raised the possibility that the former are heterogeneous , expressing SCC features to varying degrees .
Our data strongly support the hypothesis that urothelium can undergo at least three pathways of differentiation : ( a ) urothelium-type pathway ; ( b ) epidermis-type pathway ; and ( c ) glandular-type pathway , characterized by the production of UPs , K1\/K10 keratins , and secreted glycoproteins , respectively .
Vitamin A deficiency and mesenchymal factors may play a role in determining the relative contributions of these pathways to urothelial differentiation as well as to the formation of TCC , SCC , and adenocarcinoma , or a mixture thereof .
A novel IL-1 receptor, cloned from B cells by mammalian expression, is expressed in many cell types.
cDNA clones corresponding to an Mr approximately 80,000 receptor ( type I receptor ) for interleukin-1 ( IL-1 ) have been isolated previously by mammalian expression .
Here , we report the use of an improved expression cloning method to isolate human and murine cDNA clones encoding a second type ( Mr approximately 60,000 ) of IL-1 receptor ( type II receptor ) .
The mature type II IL-1 receptor consists of ( i ) a ligand binding portion comprised of three immunoglobulin-like domains ; ( ii ) a single transmembrane region ; and ( iii ) a short cytoplasmic domain of 29 amino acids .
This last contrasts with the approximately 215 amino acid cytoplasmic domain of the type I receptor , and suggests that the two IL-1 receptors may interact with different signal transduction pathways .
The type II receptor is expressed in a number of different tissues , including both B and T lymphocytes , and can be induced in several cell types by treatment with phorbol ester .
Both IL-1 receptors appear to be well conserved in evolution , and map to the same chromosomal location .
Like the type I receptor , the human type II IL-1 receptor can bind all three forms of IL-1 ( IL-1 alpha , IL-1 beta and IL-1ra ) .
Vaccinia virus contains an open reading frame bearing strong resemblance to the type II IL-1 receptor .
cDNA cloning and primary structure analysis of C1qR(P), the human C1q/MBL/SPA receptor that mediates enhanced phagocytosis in vitro.
The complement protein C1q , mannose-binding lectin ( MBL ) , and pulmonary surfactant protein A ( SPA ) are structurally similar molecules that enhance phagocytic function in vitro .
Monoclonal antibodies R3 and R139 , which inhibit the enhancement triggered by these three ligands , were used to purify a 126,000 M ( r ) cell surface protein designated C1qR ( P ) .
Amino acid sequence was obtained and the corresponding cDNA was cloned .
C1qR ( P ) is a novel type I membrane protein with the following putative structural elements : a C-type carbohydrate recognition domain , five EGF-like domains , a transmembrane domain , and a short cytoplasmic tail .
All peptides identified by amino acid sequencing are encoded by the cDNA .
Additionally , an anti-peptide antiserum was generated , which is reactive with C1qR ( P ) .
The data indicate that the cloned cDNA encodes the receptor that plays a role in C1q\/MBL\/SPA-mediated removal or destruction of pathogens and immune complexes by phagocytosis .
A novel homeobox gene PITX3 is mutated in families with autosomal-dominant cataracts and ASMD.
We report here the identification of a new human homeobox gene , PITX3 , and its involvement in anterior segment mesenchymal dysgenesis ( ASMD ) and congenital cataracts in humans .
The PITX3 gene is the human homolog of the mouse Pitx3 gene and is a member of the RIEG\/PITX homeobox gene family .
The protein encoded by PITX3 shows 99 % amino-acid identity to the mouse protein , with 100 % identity in the homeodomain and approximately 70 % overall identity to other members of this family .
We mapped the human PITX3 gene to 10q25 using a radiation-hybrid panel .
A collection of 80 DNA samples from individuals with various eye anomalies was screened for mutations in the PITX3 gene .
We identified two mutations in independent patients .
A 17-bp insertion in the 3 ' - end of the coding sequence , resulting in a frame shift , occurred in a patient with ASMD and cataracts , and a G -- ) A substitution , changing a codon for serine into a codon for asparagine , in the 5 ' - end of the gene occurred in a patient with congenital cataracts .
Both mutations cosegregate with the disease phenotype in families , and neither were found in up to 300 control individuals studied .
Further expression analysis of Pitx3 in the mouse supports a unique role in early ocular development , with later expression extending to the midbrain , tongue , incisors , sternum , vertebrae and limbs .
These data strongly suggest a role for PITX3 in ASMD and cataracts and provide new evidence of the contribution of the RIEG\/PITX gene family to the developmental program underpinning normal eye formation .
Identification of a Wnt-responsive signal transduction pathway in primary endothelial cells.
The beta-catenin signal transduction pathway , which can be activated by secreted Wnt proteins , plays a key role in normal embryonic development and in malignant transformation of the mammary gland and colon .
Here we demonstrate , for the first time , that Wnt and beta-catenin signaling also function in cells of the vasculature .
RT-PCR analysis showed that primary endothelial and smooth muscle cell cultures , of both mouse and human origin , express members of the Wnt and Wnt receptor ( Frizzled ) gene families .
Transfection of an expression vector for Wnt-1 into primary endothelial cells increased both the free pool of beta-catenin and the transcription from a Lef\/tcf-dependent reporter gene construct .
Expression of Wnt-1 , but not Wnt-5a , also stimulated proliferation of primary endothelial cell cultures .
These data show that Wnt and Frizzled proteins can regulate signal transduction , via beta-catenin , in endothelial cells .
These findings suggest that Wnt signaling may feature in normal differentiation of the vasculature as well as in pathological settings where endothelial and smooth muscle proliferation is disturbed .
Complete nucleotide sequence and genomic structure of the human NRAMP1 gene region on chromosome region 2q35.
Several lines of independent evidence suggest that human Natural Resistance Associated Macrophage Protein 1 gene ( NRAMP1 ) is an important regulator of susceptibility to infectious diseases caused by certain intracellular pathogens .
Here , we report the nucleotide sequence of 32198 bp of genomic DNA overlapping NRAMP1 on chromosomal region 2q35 .
The NRAMP1 gene spans 13604 bp .
The gene and its 5 ' genomic region are highly enriched for DNA repeat sequences .
A second gene was identified in the immediate vicinity of NRAMP1 and was tentatively named Nuclear LIM Interactor-Interacting Factor ( NLI-IF ) by analogy to its closest ortholog .
The human NLI-IF gene begins 4721 bp downstream of the NRAMP1 stop codon and is composed of seven exons varying in size from 57 bp to 1644 bp .
The gene gives rise to a 2655-bp mRNA transcript that contains a 783-bp open reading frame .
The predicted molecular weight of the 261-amino acid NLI-IF protein is 29.2 kDa .
Several putative gene regulatory elements were identified in the 5 ' upstream region of NLI-IF , including consensus binding sequences for Sp1 , AP-2 , NF-kappa B , and PU 1 .
The NLI-IF amino acid sequence has homology to proteins that have a high degree of homology with the NLI-interacting factor from Gallus gallus and are found in divergent species ranging from yeast to plants .
NLI-IF is part of a human gene family encoding four related proteins of unknown function .
Northern blot analysis of 15 different human tissues revealed a 2.6-kb NLI-IF mRNA that was ubiquitously expressed , but at varying levels .
A second transcript with estimated size of 7 kb was expressed only in the placenta .
Our data provide new sequence information about the NRAMP1 gene region that will be useful in the search for genetic variants causally involved in altered susceptibility to infectious diseases .
The telomeric poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase, tankyrase 1, contains multiple binding sites for telomeric repeat binding factor 1 (TRF1) and a novel acceptor, 182-kDa tankyrase-binding protein (TAB182).
Tankyrase 1 , a human telomeric poly ( ADP-ribose ) polymerase , was originally identified through its interaction with TRF1 , a negative regulator of telomere length .
Tankyrase 1 ADP-ribosylates TRF1 in vitro , and its overexpression induces telomere elongation in human cancer cells .
In addition to its telomeric localization , tankyrase 1 resides at multiple subcellular sites , suggesting additional functions for this protein .
Here we identify TAB182 , a novel tankyrase 1-binding protein of 182 kDa .
TAB182 displays a complex pattern of subcellular localization .
TAB182 localizes to the nucleus in a heterochromatic staining pattern and to the cytoplasm , where it co-stains with the cortical actin network .
TAB182 coimmunoprecipitates with tankyrase 1 from human cells and serves as an acceptor of poly ( ADP-ribosyl ) ation by tankyrase 1 in vitro .
Like TRF1 , TAB182 binds to the ankyrin domain ( comprising 24 ankyrin repeats ) of tankyrase 1 .
Surprisingly , dissection of this domain reveals multiple discrete and overlapping binding sites for TRF1 and TAB182 .
Thus , we demonstrate five well conserved ankyrin repeat clusters in tankyrase 1 .
Although each of the five ankyrin repeat clusters independently binds to TRF1 , only three of the five bind toTAB182 .
These findings suggest that tankyrase 1 may act as a scaffold for large molecular mass complexes made up of multiple binding proteins .
We discuss potential roles for tankyrase 1-mediated higher order complexes at telomeres and at other subcellular sites .
Composite co-activator ARC mediates chromatin-directed transcriptional activation.
Gene activation in eukaryotes is regulated by complex mechanisms in which the recruitment and assembly of the transcriptional machinery is directed by gene - and cell-type-specific DNA-binding proteins .
When DNA is packaged into chromatin , the regulation of gene activation requires new classes of chromatin-targeting activity .
In humans , a multisubunit cofactor functions in a chromatin-selective manner to potentiate synergistic gene activation by the transcriptional activators SREBP-1a and Sp1 .
Here we show that this activator-recruited cofactor ( ARC ) interacts directly with several different activators , including SREBP-1a , VP16 and the p65 subunit of NF-kappaB , and strongly enhances transcription directed by these activators in vitro with chromatin-assembled DNA templates .
The ARC complex consists of 16 or more subunits ; some of these are novel gene products , whereas others are present in other multisubunit cofactors , such as CRSP , NAT and mammalian Mediator .
Detailed analysis indicates that the ARC complex is probably identical to the nuclear hormone-receptor cofactor DRIP .
Thus , ARC\/DRIP is a large composite co-activator that belongs to a family of related cofactors and is targeted by different classes of activator to mediate transcriptional stimulation .
A transcriptional mediator protein that is required for activation of many RNA polymerase II promoters and is conserved from yeast to humans.
A temperature-sensitive mutation was obtained in Med6p , a component of the mediator complex from the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae .
The mediator complex has been shown to enable transcriptional activation in vitro .
This mutation in Med6p abolished activation of transcription from four of five inducible promoters tested in vivo .
There was no effect , however , on uninduced transcription , transcription of constitutively expressed genes , or transcription by RNA polymerases I and III .
Mediator-RNA polymerase II complex isolated from the mutant yeast strain was temperature sensitive for transcriptional activation in a reconstituted in vitro system due to a defect in initiation complex formation .
A database search revealed the existence of MED6-related genes in humans and Caenorhabditis elegans , suggesting that the role of mediator in transcriptional activation is conserved throughout the evolution .
Mitomycin C resistance induced by TCF-3 overexpression in gastric cancer cell line MKN28 is associated with DT-diaphorase down-regulation.
TCF transcription factors are mediators of the WNT signaling pathway and are antagonized by the transforming growth factor beta signaling pathway .
Here human TCF-3 has been cloned and characterized .
Differential expression analyses of TCF genes in gastric cancer revealed that TCF-1 was expressed in most cases of primary gastric cancer at almost the same level as in normal gastric mucosa and that TCF-3 was occasionally up-regulated in primary gastric cancer .
The TCF-3 expression vector was transfected to gastric cancer cell line MKN28 to establish stable transformants .
Three independent MKN28 transformants overexpressing TCF-3 showed about 8-fold resistance to mitomycin C ( MMC ; IC50 , 2.4 microg\/ml ) compared with MKN28 vector transfectants ( IC50 = 0.3 microg\/ml ) .
Among the 10 drug resistance-associated genes examined in this study , the DT-diaphorase ( DTD ) gene was down-regulated in three MKN28 transformants overexpressing TCF-3 .
DTD mRNA was also down-regulated in primary gastric cancer with TCF-3 up-regulation .
In addition , DTD protein was down-regulated in three MKN28 transformants overexpressing TCF-3 compared with MKN28 vector transfectants .
DTD is implicated in the activation of MMC in target cells , and DTD down-regulation explains MMC resistance .
MMC resistance induced by TCF-3 overexpression is probably due to DTD down-regulation , which might provide a possible target for new therapy of drug-resistant gastric cancer .
Molecular cloning and characterization of a novel type of histamine receptor preferentially expressed in leukocytes.
Recently cDNA encoding the histamine H3 receptor was isolated after 15 years of considerable research .
However , several studies have proposed heterogeneity of the H3 receptor .
We report here the molecular cloning and characterization of a novel type of histamine receptor .
A novel orphan G-protein-coupled receptor named GPRv53 was obtained through a search of the human genomic DNA data base and analyzed by rapid amplification of cDNA ends ( RACE ) .
GPRv53 possessed the features of biologic amine receptors and had the highest homology with H3 receptor among known G-protein-coupled receptors .
Mammalian cells expressing GPRv53 were demonstrated to bind and respond to histamine in a concentration-dependent manner .
In functional assays , not only an H3 receptor agonist , R - ( alpha ) - methylhistamine , but also a H3 receptor antagonist , clobenpropit , and a neuroleptic , clozapine , activated GPRv53-expressing cells .
Tissue distribution analysis revealed that expression of GPRv53 is localized in the peripheral blood leukocytes , spleen , thymus , and colon , which was totally different from the H3 receptor , whose expression was restricted to the brain .
The discovery of the GPRv53 receptor will open a new phase of research on the physiological role of histamine .
Molecular cloning and mapping of the human nicotinic acetylcholine receptor alpha10 (CHRNA10).
We report the isolation and initial characterization of a new member of the human nicotinic acetylcholine receptor ( nAChR ) subunit family , alpha10 ( CHRNA10 ) , from both inner-ear neuroepithelium and lymphoid tissue .
The cDNA is 1959 nucleotides in length , with a coding region predicting a protein of 451 amino acids that is 90 % identical to rat alpha10 .
The alpha10 gene was localized to chromosome 11p15 .5 .
Human alpha10 was detected in human inner-ear tissue , tonsil , immortalized B-cells , cultured T-cells and peripheral blood lymphocytes using reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction , Northern blot hybridization , and immunohistochemistry .
We also detected the expression of the human nAChR alpha9 ( CHRNA9 ) mRNA in these same tissues using RT-PCR and Northern blot hybridization .
A mutation in OTOF, encoding otoferlin, a FER-1-like protein, causes DFNB9, a nonsyndromic form of deafness.
Using a candidate gene approach , we identified a novel human gene , OTOF , underlying an autosomal recessive , nonsyndromic prelingual deafness , DFNB9 .
The same nonsense mutation was detected in four unrelated affected families of Lebanese origin .
OTOF is the second member of a mammalian gene family related to Caenorhabditis elegans fer-1 .
It encodes a predicted cytosolic protein ( of 1,230 aa ) with three C2 domains and a single carboxy-terminal transmembrane domain .
The sequence homologies and predicted structure of otoferlin , the protein encoded by OTOF , suggest its involvement in vesicle membrane fusion .
In the inner ear , the expression of the orthologous mouse gene , mainly in the sensory hair cells , indicates that such a role could apply to synaptic vesicles .
Statherin: a major boundary lubricant of human saliva.
The lubricating properties of human submandibular-sublingual salivary fractions were examined using a servohydraulic model of mandibular movement .
Fractions containing statherin exhibited a strong tendency to boundary lubrication .
The lubricity of purified statherin was confirmed and compared to the amphipathic molecules gramacidin S and sodium dodecyl sulfate .
Contact angle measurements of statherin paralleled the other amphipathic molecules .
The helical content of statherin increased in trifluoroethanol indicating the presence of amphipathic helical regions .
CD studies and hydrophobic moment calculations indicated that statherin adopts an amphipathic helical conformation at the N-terminus .
An energy-minimized model of the polar N-terminal residues 1-15 suggested that this domain could be positioned in space to interact with a hydroxyapatite substrate .
These data imply that under appropriate conditions statherin may display an amphipathic nature which enables it to function as a boundary lubricant on enamel .
US11 of herpes simplex virus type 1 interacts with HIPK2 and antagonizes HIPK2-induced cell growth arrest.
Homeodomain-interacting protein kinase 2 ( HIPK2 ) is a nuclear serine\/threonine kinase of the subfamily of dual-specificity Yak1-related kinase proteins .
HIPK2 was first described as a homeodomain-interacting protein kinase acting as a corepressor for homeodomain transcription factors .
More recently , it was reported that HIPK2 plays a role in p53-mediated cellular apoptosis and could also participate in the regulation of the cell cycle .
US11 protein of herpes simplex virus type 1 is a multifunctional protein involved in the regulation of several processes related to the survival of cells submitted to environmental stresses by mechanisms that are not fully elucidated .
In an attempt to better understand the multiple functions of US11 , we identified cellular binding partners of this protein by using the yeast two-hybrid system .
We report that US11 interacts with HIPK2 through the PEST domain of HIPK2 and that this interaction occurs also in human cells .
This interaction modifies the subcellular distribution of HIPK2 and protects the cell against the HIPK2-induced cell growth arrest .
Five members of a novel Ca(2+)-binding protein (CABP) subfamily with similarity to calmodulin.
Five members of a novel Ca ( 2 + ) - binding protein subfamily ( CaBP ) , with 46-58 % sequence similarity to calmodulin ( CaM ) , were identified in the vertebrate retina .
Important differences between these Ca ( 2 + ) - binding proteins and CaM include alterations within their second EF-hand loop that render these motifs inactive in Ca ( 2 + ) coordination and the fact that their central alpha-helixes are extended by one alpha-helical turn .
CaBP1 and CaBP2 contain a consensus sequence for N-terminal myristoylation , similar to members of the recoverin subfamily and are fatty acid acylated in vitro .
The patterns of expression differ for each of the various members .
Expression of CaBP5 , for example , is restricted to retinal rod and cone bipolar cells .
In contrast , CaBP1 has a more widespread pattern of expression .
In the brain , CaBP1 is found in the cerebral cortex and hippocampus , and in the retina this protein is found in cone bipolar and amacrine cells .
CaBP1 and CaBP2 are expressed as multiple , alternatively spliced variants , and in heterologous expression systems these forms show different patterns of subcellular localization .
In reconstitution assays , CaBPs are able to substitute functionally for CaM .
These data suggest that these novel CaBPs are an important component of Ca ( 2 + ) - mediated cellular signal transduction in the central nervous system where they may augment or substitute for CaM .
Purification, molecular cloning, and genomic organization of human brain long-chain acyl-CoA hydrolase.
An acyl-CoA hydrolase , referred to as hBACH , was purified from human brain cytosol .
The enzyme had a molecular mass of 100 kDa and 43-kDa subunits , and was highly active with long-chain acyl-CoAs , e.g. a maximal velocity of 295 micromol\/min\/mg and K ( m ) of 6.4 microM for palmitoyl-CoA .
Acyl-CoAs with carbon chain lengths of C ( 8-18 ) were also good substrates .
In human brain cytosol , 85 % of palmitoyl-CoA hydrolase activity was titrated by an anti-BACH antibody , which accounted for over 75 % of the enzyme activity found in the brain tissue .
The cDNA isolated for hBACH , when expressed in Escherichia coli , directed the expression of palmitoyl-CoA hydrolase activity and a 44-kDa protein immunoreactive to the anti-BACH antibody , which in turn neutralized the hydrolase activity .
The hBACH cDNA encoded a 338-amino acid sequence which was 95 % identical to that of a rat homolog .
The hBACH gene spanned about 130 kb and comprised 9 exons , and was mapped to 1p36 .2 on the cytogenetic ideogram .
These findings indicate that the long-chain acyl-CoA hydrolase present in the brain is well conserved between man and the rat , suggesting a conserved role for this enzyme in the mammalian brain , and enabling genetic studies on the functional analysis of acyl-CoA hydrolase .
Self-assembling protein microarrays.
Protein microarrays provide a powerful tool for the study of protein function .
However , they are not widely used , in part because of the challenges in producing proteins to spot on the arrays .
We generated protein microarrays by printing complementary DNAs onto glass slides and then translating target proteins with mammalian reticulocyte lysate .
Epitope tags fused to the proteins allowed them to be immobilized in situ .
This obviated the need to purify proteins , avoided protein stability problems during storage , and captured sufficient protein for functional studies .
We used the technology to map pairwise interactions among 29 human DNA replication initiation proteins , recapitulate the regulation of Cdt1 binding to select replication proteins , and map its geminin-binding domain .
Positional cloning of zebrafish ferroportin1 identifies a conserved vertebrate iron exporter.
Defects in iron absorption and utilization lead to iron deficiency and overload disorders .
Adult mammals absorb iron through the duodenum , whereas embryos obtain iron through placental transport .
Iron uptake from the intestinal lumen through the apical surface of polarized duodenal enterocytes is mediated by the divalent metal transporter , DMTi .
A second transporter has been postulated to export iron across the basolateral surface to the circulation .
Here we have used positional cloning to identify the gene responsible for the hypochromic anemia of the zebrafish mutant weissherbst .
The gene , ferroportin1 , encodes a multiple-transmembrane domain protein , expressed in the yolk sac , that is a candidate for the elusive iron exporter .
Zebrafish ferroportin1 is required for the transport of iron from maternally derived yolk stores to the circulation and functions as an iron exporter when expressed in Xenopus oocytes .
Human Ferroportin1 is found at the basal surface of placental syncytiotrophoblasts , suggesting that it also transports iron from mother to embryo .
Mammalian Ferroportin1 is expressed at the basolateral surface of duodenal enterocytes and could export cellular iron into the circulation .
We propose that Ferroportin1 function may be perturbed in mammalian disorders of iron deficiency or overload .
The VacA toxin of Helicobacter pylori identifies a new intermediate filament-interacting protein.
The VacA toxin produced by Helicobacter pylori acts inside cells and induces the formation of vacuoles arising from late endosomal\/lysosomal compartments .
Using VacA as bait in a yeast two-hybrid screening of a HeLa cell library , we have identified a novel protein of 54 kDa ( VIP54 ) , which interacts specifically with VacA , as indicated by co-immunoprecipitation and binding experiments .
VIP54 is expressed in cultured cells and many tissues , with higher expression in the brain , muscle , kidney and liver .
Confocal immunofluorescence microscopy with anti-VIP54 affinity - purified antibodies shows a fibrous pattern typical of intermediate filaments .
Double label immunofluorescence performed on various cell lines with antibodies specific to different intermediate filament proteins revealed that VIP54 largely co-distributes with vimentin .
In contrast to known intermediate filament proteins , VIP54 is predicted to contain approximately 50 % of helical segments , but no extended coiled-coil regions .
The possible involvement of this novel protein in interactions between intermediate filaments and late endosomal compartments is discussed .
FIF [fibroblast growth factor-2 (FGF-2)-interacting-factor], a nuclear putatively antiapoptotic factor, interacts specifically with FGF-2.
Numerous evidence indicates that some of the activities of fibroblast growth factor 2 ( FGF-2 ) depend on an intracrine mode of action .
Recently , we showed that three high molecular mass ( HMM ) nuclear forms of FGF-2 are part of a 320-kDa protein complex while the cytoplasmic AUG-initiated form is included in a 130-kDa complex .
Consequently , the characterization of FGF endogenous targets has become crucial to allow the elucidation of their endogenous activities .
Through the screening of GAL4-based yeast two-hybrid expression libraries , we have isolated a gene encoding a nuclear protein of 55 kDa , FIF ( FGF-2-interacting-factor ) , which interacts specifically with FGF-2 but not with FGF-1 , FGF-3 , or FGF-6 .
In this system , FIF interacts equally well with the NH2-extended 24-kDa FGF form as with the 18-kDa form , indicating that the FIF-binding motif is located in the last 155 amino acids of FGF-2 .
Nevertheless , coimmunoprecipitation experiments showed an exclusive association with HMM FGF-2 .
The predicted protein contains a canonical leucine zipper domain and three overlapping hydrophobic heptad repeats .
The region spanning these repeats is , together with a region located in the N-terminal part of the FIF protein , implicated in the binding to FGF-2 .
In contrast to the full-length FIF protein , several deletion constructs were able to transactivate a lac-Z reporter gene .
Furthermore , the COOH-terminal part , but not the full-length FIF protein , has previously been shown to exhibit antiapoptotic properties .
Thus we discuss the possibility that these activities could reflect a physiological function of FIF through its interaction with FGF-2 .
A 12R-lipoxygenase in human skin: mechanistic evidence, molecular cloning, and expression.
A recognized feature of psoriasis and other proliferative dermatoses is accumulation in the skin of the unusual arachidonic acid metabolite , 12R-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid ( 12R-HETE ) .
This hydroxy fatty acid is opposite in chirality to the product of the well-known 12S-lipoxygenase and heretofore in mammals is known only as a product of cytochrome P450s .
Here we provide mechanistic evidence for a lipoxygenase route to 12R-HETE in human psoriatic tissue and describe a 12R-lipoxygenase that can account for the biosynthesis .
Initially we demonstrated retention of the C-12 deuterium of octadeuterated arachidonic acid in its conversion to 12R-HETE in incubations of psoriatic scales , indicating the end product is not formed by isomerization from 12S-H ( P ) ETE via the 12-keto derivative .
Secondly , analysis of product formed from ( 10R-3H ) and ( 10S-3H ) - labeled arachidonic acids revealed that 12R-HETE synthesis is associated with stereospecific removal of the pro-R hydrogen from the 10-carbon of arachidonate .
This result is compatible with 12R-lipoxygenase-catalyzed formation of 12R-HETE and not with a P450-catalyzed route to 12R-HETE in psoriatic scales .
We cloned a lipoxygenase from human keratinocytes ; the cDNA and deduced amino acid sequences share ( \/ = 50 % identity to other human lipoxygenases .
This enzyme , when expressed in Hela cells , oxygenates arachidonic acid to 12-HPETE , ) 98 % 12R in configuration .
The 12R-lipoxygenase cDNA is detectable by PCR in psoriatic scales and as a 2.5-kilobase mRNA by Northern analysis of keratinocytes .
Identification of this enzyme extends the known distribution of R-lipoxygenases to humans and presents an additional target for potential therapeutic interventions in psoriasis .
A novel immunoglobulin superfamily receptor (19A) related to CD2 is expressed on activated lymphocytes and promotes homotypic B-cell adhesion.
A novel lymphocyte-specific immunoglobulin superfamily protein ( 19A ) has been cloned .
The predicted 335-amino-acid sequence of 19A represents a Type 1 membrane protein with homology with the CD2 family of receptors .
A molecular model of the two predicted extracellular immunoglobulin-like domains of 19A has been generated using the crystal structure of CD2 as a template .
In isolated lymphocytes , expression of 19A is induced by various activation stimuli , and enforced expression of the 19A gene promotes homotypic cell adhesion in a B-cell-line model .
Collectively these data imply that the 19A protein plays a role in regulation of lymphocyte adhesion .
A novel human actin-binding protein homologue that binds to platelet glycoprotein Ibalpha.
Glycoprotein ( GP ) Ib-IX-V is one of the major transmembrane complexes present on the platelet surface .
Its extracellular domain binds von Willebrand factor ( vWF ) and thrombin , while its intracellular domain associates tightly with the cytoskeleton through the actin-binding protein ( ABP ) -280 , also known as filamin .
In the present study , a full-length cDNA coding for a human ABP homolog has been cloned and sequenced .
This protein was identified by the yeast two-hybrid screening procedure via its interaction with the intracellular domain of GPIbalpha .
Initially , a 1.3-kb partial cDNA was isolated from a megakaryocyte-like cell line ( K562 ) cDNA library followed by a full-length cDNA of 9.4 kb that was identified in a human placenta library .
The full-length cDNA encoded a protein of 2,578 amino acids with a calculated molecular weight of 276 kD ( ABP-276 ) .
The amino terminal 248 amino acids contained an apparent actin binding domain followed by 24 tandem repeats each containing about 96 amino acids .
The amino acid sequence of the protein shared a high degree of homology with human endothelial ABP-280 ( 70 % identity ) and chicken filamin ( 83 % identity ) .
However , the 32 amino acid Hinge I region in ABP-280 that contains a calpain cleavage site conferring flexibility on the molecule , was absent in the homolog .
An isoform containing a 24 amino acid insertion with a unique sequence at the missing Hinge I region was also identified ( ABP-278 ) .
This isoform resulted from alternative RNA splicing .
ABP-276 and\/or ABP-278 were present in all tissues examined , but the relative amount varied in that some tissue contained both forms , while other tissue contained predominately one or the other .
Human aminopeptidase B (rnpep) on chromosome 1q32.2: complementary DNA, genomic structure and expression.
Aminopeptidase B ( APB ) is a Zn ( 2 + ) - metalloexopeptidase , which selectively removes Arg and\/or Lys residues from the N-terminus of several peptide substrates .
Several data strongly support the hypothesis that this enzyme could participate in the final stages of precursor processing mechanisms and\/or in particular inflammatory processes and tumor developments .
Therefore , we have cloned the complementary DNA encoding the human APB , a 658-residues protein , containing the canonical '' HEXXH ( X ( 18 ) ) E '' , a signature allowing its classification in the M1 family of metallopeptidases .
The genomic structure of the human APB gene ( rnpep ; 1q32.1-q32 .2 ) was also determined .
rnpep is bracketed by pre-protein translocase of the inner mitochondrial membrane gene and ETS family transcription factor ELF3 gene .
It spans more than 24 kbp and contains 11 exons ranging from 109 to 574 bp .
Finally , expression of the human APB messenger RNA ( mRNA ) was investigated using a pre-made dot-blot .
This mRNA seems to be ubiquitous although its expression level varies depending of the cells or tissues considered .
Ligand-dependent transcription activation by nuclear receptors requires the DRIP complex.
Nuclear receptors modulate the transcription of genes in direct response to small lipophilic ligands .
Binding to ligands induces conformational changes in the nuclear receptors that enable the receptors to interact with several types of cofactor that are critical for transcription activation ( transactivation ) .
We previously described a distinct set of ligand-dependent proteins called DRIPs , which interact with the vitamin D receptor ( VDR ) ; together , these proteins constitute a new cofactor complex .
DRIPs bind to several nuclear receptors and mediate ligand-dependent enhancement of transcription by VDR and the thyroid-hormone receptor in cell-free transcription assays .
Here we report the identities of thirteen DRIPs that constitute this complex , and show that the complex has a central function in hormone-dependent transactivation by VDR on chromatin templates .
The DRIPs are almost indistinguishable from components of another new cofactor complex called ARC , which is recruited by other types of transcription activators to mediate transactivation on chromatin-assembled templates .
Several DRIP\/ARC subunits are also components of other potentially related cofactors , such as CRSP , NAT , SMCC and the mouse Mediator , indicating that unique classes of activators may share common sets or subsets of cofactors .
The role of nuclear-receptor ligands may , in part , be to recruit such a cofactor complex to the receptor and , in doing so , to enhance transcription of target genes .
Identification of a family of human F-box proteins.
F-box proteins are an expanding family of eukaryotic proteins characterized by an approximately 40 aminoacid motif , the F box ( so named because cyclin F was one of the first proteins in which this motif was identified ) ( 1 ) .
Some F-box proteins have been shown to be critical for the controlled degradation of cellular regulatory proteins ( 2 ) ( 3 ) .
In fact , F-box proteins are one of the four subunits of ubiquitin protein ligases called SCFs .
The other three subunits are the Skp1 protein ; one of the cullin proteins ( Cul1 in metazoans and Cdc53 or Cul A in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae ) ; and the recently identified Roc1 protein ( also called Rbx1 or Hrt1 ) .
SCF ligases bring ubiquitin conjugating enzymes ( either Ubc3 or Ubc4 ) to substrates that are specifically recruited by the different F-box proteins .
The need for high substrate specificity and the large number of known F-box proteins in yeast and worms ( 2 ) ( 4 ) suggest the existence of a large family of mammalian F-box proteins .
Using Skp1 as a bait in a yeast two-hybrid screen and by searching DNA databases , we identified a family of 26 human F-box proteins , 25 of which were novel .
Some of these proteins contained WD-40 domains or leucine-rich repeats ; others contained either different protein-protein interaction modules or no recognizable motifs .
We have named the F-box proteins that contain WD-40 domains Fbws , those containing leucine-rich repeats , Fbls , and the remaining ones Fbxs .
We have further characterized representative members of these three classes of F-box proteins .
Characterization of TCL, a new GTPase of the rho family related to TC10 andCcdc42.
GTPases of the Rho family control a wide variety of cellular processes such as cell morphology , motility , proliferation , differentiation , and apoptosis .
We report here the characterization of a new Rho member , which shares 85 % and 78 % amino acid similarity to TC10 and Cdc42 , respectively .
This GTPase , termed as TC10-like ( TCL ) is encoded by an unexpectedly large locus , made of five exons spanning over 85 kilobases on human chromosome 14 .
TCL mRNA is 2.5 kilobases long and is mainly expressed in heart .
In vitro , TCL shows rapid GDP\/GTP exchange and displays higher GTP dissociation and hydolysis rates than TC10 .
Using the yeast two-hybrid system and GST pull-down assays , we show that GTP-bound but not GDP-bound TCL protein directly interacts with Cdc42\/Rac interacting binding domains , such as those found in PAK and WASP .
Despite its overall similarity to TC10 and Cdc42 , the constitutively active TCL mutant displays distinct morphogenic activity in REF-52 fibroblasts , producing large and dynamic F-actin-rich ruffles on the dorsal cell membrane .
Interestingly , TCL morphogenic activity is blocked by dominant negative Rac1 and Cdc42 mutants , suggesting a cross-talk between these three Rho GTPases .
Cloning and characterization of cDNA encoding a novel human leukotriene B(4) receptor.
By homology screening using BLAST searches of expressed sequence tags ( ESTs ) , we have found a previously unidentified cDNA encoding a putative seven-transmembrane receptor with highest similarity to the leukotriene B ( 4 ) receptor , BLTR .
Analysis of calcium flow in transfected cells , along with sequence analysis , revealed that the EST encoded a functionally inactive protein , lacking the segment corresponding to the C-terminal part of the putative receptor protein .
The missing segment was obtained by PCR amplification of a human leukocyte cDNA library and ligated to the truncated EST cDNA .
The novel cDNA encodes a full-length receptor with 39 % identity to the previously cloned BLTR .
Studies of intracellular calcium flow of transfected HeLa cells exposed to various leukotrienes showed that also the novel BLTR-like receptor can be activated by leukotriene B ( 4 ) , and it is therefore tentatively named BLTR2 .
Isolation and characterization of a novel ligand-dependent thyroid hormone receptor-coactivating protein.
The thyroid hormone receptor ( TR ) regulates the expression of target genes upon binding to triiodothyronine ( T3 ) response elements .
In the presence of T3 , the TR recruits coactivating proteins that both modulate and integrate the ligand response .
We report here the cloning of a novel protein using the TR ligand-binding domain as bait in the yeast two-hybrid system .
Analysis of a putative full-length clone demonstrates a cDNA sequence that encodes a protein of 920 amino acids with a size of 120 kDa ( p120 ) .
Alignment with known sequences shows homology to a previously identified protein of unknown function , termed skeletal muscle abundant protein .
Interaction studies demonstrate that p120 interacts with the TR AF-2 domain in the presence of ligand through a 111-amino acid region .
Northern analysis demonstrates widespread expression in human tissues .
Cotransfection assays in CV-1 cells demonstrate that p120 enhances TR-mediated transactivation on multiple T3 response elements in the presence of T3 .
In addition , CREB-binding protein synergizes with p120 to enhance this effect .
When linked to the GAL4 DNA-binding domain , p120 is an activator of transcription alone .
Thus , p120 satisfies a number of important criteria as a nuclear receptor coactivator .
DACH1 inhibits transforming growth factor-beta signaling through binding Smad4.
The vertebrate homologs of Drosophila dachsund , DACH1 and DACH2 , have been implicated as important regulatory genes in development .
DACH1 plays a role in retinal and pituitary precursor cell proliferation and DACH2 plays a specific role in myogenesis .
DACH proteins contain a domain ( DS domain ) that is conserved with the proto-oncogenes Ski and Sno .
Since the Ski\/Sno proto-oncogenes repress AP-1 and SMAD signaling , we hypothesized that DACH1 might play a similar cellular function .
Herein , DACH1 was found to be expressed in breast cancer cell lines and to inhibit transforming growth factor-beta ( TGF-beta ) - induced apoptosis .
DACH1 repressed TGF-beta induction of AP-1 and Smad signaling in gene reporter assays and repressed endogenous TGF-beta-responsive genes by microarray analyses .
DACH1 bound to endogenous NCoR and Smad4 in cultured cells and DACH1 co-localized with NCoR in nuclear dotlike structures .
NCoR enhanced DACH1 repression , and the repression of TGF-beta-induced AP-1 or Smad signaling by DACH1 required the DACH1 DS domain .
The DS domain of DACH was sufficient for NCoR binding at a Smad4-binding site .
Smad4 was required for DACH1 repression of Smad signaling .
In Smad4 null HTB-134 cells , DACH1 inhibited the activation of SBE-4 reporter activity induced by Smad2 or Smad3 only in the presence of Smad4 .
DACH1 participates in the negative regulation of TGF-beta signaling by interacting with NCoR and Smad4 .
Identification and characterization of a human mitochondrial homologue of the bacterial co-chaperone GrpE.
We have identified a novel human cDNA with a predicted protein sequence that has 28 % amino acid identity with the E. coli Hsp70 co-chaperone GrpE and designated it HMGE .
Even with this low level of amino acid identity the human sequence could be efficiently modelled on the X-ray structure of the E. coli protein , suggesting that there may be significant functional conservation .
Indeed , HMGE expressed in E. coli as a GST fusion protein co-purified with the E. coli Hsp70 protein DnaK in the absence of ATP .
DnaK could be released from the GST-HMGE with a Mg-ATP wash. .
Subcellular fractionation and immunocytochemistry studies using antisera raized against HMGE show that it is a mitochondrial protein .
In contrast to studies of rat GrpE , however , HMGE also appears to bind the constitutive cytosolic Hsp70 , Hsc70 , in addition to mitochondrial Hsp70 , Mt-Hsp70 .
We have previously shown that Hsc70 nucleotide-exchange is rate limiting in the presence of the DnaJ-protein , HSJ1b .
However , HMGE was found to inhibit the HSJ1b-enhanced Hsc70 ATPase activity and may mediate this inhibition by binding the DnaJ-protein , HSJ1b .
This is the first description of a direct interaction between a DnaJ protein and GrpE-like protein .
These studies suggest that the structure of GrpE has been conserved throughout evolution and that the conserved structure can interact with several forms of Hsp70 , but that HMGE can not form part of the reaction cycle for cytosolic Hsc70 .
A novel Src homology 2 domain-containing molecule, Src-like adapter protein-2 (SLAP-2), which negatively regulates T cell receptor signaling.
We have cloned a novel adapter protein containing Src homology 2 and Src homology 3 domains similar to the Src family of tyrosine kinases .
This molecule lacks a catalytic tyrosine kinase domain and is related to a previously identified protein , Src-like adapter protein ( SLAP ) , and is therefore designated SLAP-2 .
Northern blot analysis indicates that SLAP-2 is predominantly expressed in the immune system .
Jurkat T cells express SLAP-2 protein and overexpression of SLAP-2 in these cells negatively regulates T cell receptor signaling as assessed by interleukin-2 promoter or NF-AT promoter reporter constructs .
Mutational analysis revealed that an intact SH2 domain of SLAP-2 is essential for this inhibitory effect , whereas mutation of the SH3 domain alone has no effect .
This inhibitory effect is upstream of the activation of Ras and increase of intracellular calcium levels , as no inhibition was observed when the cells were activated by phorbol ester plus ionomycin .
SLAP-2 interacts with Cbl in vivo in a phosphorylation independent manner and with ZAP-70 and T cell receptor zeta chain upon T cell receptor activation .
Finally , we show that the mutation of a predicted myristoylation site within the NH ( 2 ) - terminal of SLAP-2 is essential for its inhibitory effect .
This report therefore implicates SLAP and SLAP-2 as a family of adapter proteins that negatively regulate T cell receptor signaling .
Cloning, genomic organization, and tissue distribution of human Ssf-1.
During the screening of a human placenta cDNA library , realized in order to isolate the P2Y ( 11 ) coding sequence , an unrelated cDNA was cloned .
We identified a 1422 bp open reading frame encoding a human protein displaying 40 % amino acid identity with the Saccharomyces cerevisiae Ssf-1 , a protein involved in the second step of mRNA splicing .
Sequencing of the corresponding genomic DNA showed that the gene encoding human Ssf-1 is located upstream to the P2Y ( 11 ) gene on chromosome 19p31 .
Comparison of the cDNA and genomic DNA sequences revealed that the human Ssf-1 gene is split into 12 exons .
Northern blotting experiments showed that the 1.7 kb Ssf-1 mRNA presents an ubiquitous tissue expression .
We also show that , in HL-60 human promyelocytic leukemia cells , Ssf-1 mRNA is rapidly upregulated following a treatment by granulocyte-colony stimulating factor and dibutyryl-cyclicAMP , two agents known to induce the granulocytic differentiation of these cells .
betaIV spectrin, a new spectrin localized at axon initial segments and nodes of ranvier in the central and peripheral nervous system.
We report the identification of betaIV spectrin , a novel spectrin isolated as an interactor of the receptor tyrosine phosphatase-like protein ICA512 .
The betaIV spectrin gene is located on human and mouse chromosomes 19q13 .13 and 7b2 , respectively .
Alternative splicing of betaIV spectrin generates at least four distinct isoforms , numbered betaIVSigma1-betaIVSigma4 spectrin .
The longest isoform ( betaIVSigma1 spectrin ) includes an actin-binding domain , followed by 17 spectrin repeats , a specific domain in which the amino acid sequence ERQES is repeated four times , several putative SH3-binding sites and a pleckstrin homology domain .
betaIVSigma2 and betaIVSigma3 spectrin encompass the NH ( 2 ) - and COOH-terminal halves of betaIVSigma1 spectrin , respectively , while betaIVSigma4 spectrin lacks the ERQES and the pleckstrin homology domain .
Northern blots revealed an abundant expression of betaIV spectrin transcripts in brain and pancreatic islets .
By immunoblotting , betaIVSigma1 spectrin is recognized as a protein of 250 kD .
Anti-betaIV spectrin antibodies also react with two additional isoforms of 160 and 140 kD .
These isoforms differ from betaIVSigma1 spectrin in terms of their distribution on subcellular fractionation , detergent extractability , and phosphorylation .
In islets , the immunoreactivity for betaIV spectrin is more prominent in alpha than in beta cells .
In brain , betaIV spectrin is enriched in myelinated neurons , where it colocalizes with ankyrin ( G ) 480\/270-kD at axon initial segments and nodes of Ranvier .
Likewise , betaIV spectrin is concentrated at the nodes of Ranvier in the rat sciatic nerve .
In the rat hippocampus , betaIVSigma1 spectrin is detectable from embryonic day 19 , concomitantly with the appearance of immunoreactivity at the initial segments .
Thus , we suggest that betaIVSigma1 spectrin interacts with ankyrin ( G ) 480\/270-kD and participates in the clustering of voltage-gated Na ( + ) channels and cell-adhesion molecules at initial segments and nodes of Ranvier .
MMP-28, a new human matrix metalloproteinase with an unusual cysteine-switch sequence is widely expressed in tumors.
We report the discovery , cloning , and characterization of a novel human matrix metalloproteinase ( MMP-28 ) cDNA gene .
The deduced 520-amino-acid sequence of MMP-28 includes a signal peptide , a prodomain with an unusual cysteine-switch PRCGVTD motif followed by the furin cleavage RRKKR site , a catalytic domain , a hinge-region and a hemopexin-like domain .
On the basis of their structural characteristics , MMP-28 belongs to the MMP-19 subfamily .
The genomic MMP-28 gene uniquely mapped to chromosome 17q11 .2 includes eight exons and seven introns .
The broad range of expression in carcinomas as well as normal adult and fetal tissues suggests an important functional role for MMP-28 .
AAC-11 overexpression induces invasion and protects cervical cancer cells from apoptosis.
To identify the genes involved in cervical carcinogenesis , we applied the mRNA differential display ( DD ) method to analyze normal cervical tissue , cervical cancer , metastatic lymph node , and cervical cancer cell line .
We cloned a 491-bp cDNA fragment , CC231 , which was present in metastatic tissue and cervical cancer cell line , but absent in normal cervical and cervical cancer tissues .
The 491 bp cDNA fragment has 98 % homology to the previously published sequence , AAC-11 ( antiapoptosis clone 11 ) .
The levels of AAC-11 mRNA expressions in nine normal cervical and nine primary cervical cancer tissues were low .
Its expression was higher in three metastatic tissues and five cervical cancer cell lines ( HeLa , CaSki , SiHa , CUMC-3 , and CUMC-6 ) .
Invasion of matrigel and adhesion to laminin by AAC-11 transfected CUMC-6 cells were increased by approximately 2-fold and 4-fold , respectively .
Northern blot analysis showed that matrix metalloproteinase ( MMP ) -2 and membrane type 1 MMP ( MT1-MMP ) genes were found to be expressed in high levels in AAC-11-transfected cancer cells .
But MMP-2 and MT1-MMP were not expressed in cells transfected with vector alone or wild-type cells .
AAC-11-transfected cells expressed an elevated level of MMP-2 protein as assessed by immunoblotting .
On the contrary , tissue inhibitor of MMP ( TIMP-2 ) expression was detectable in cells transfected with vector alone or wild-type cells , respectively .
Its expression was undetectable in AAC-11 transfected cells .
In cervical cancer cells transfected with AAC-11 , the expression of beta-catenin was up-regulated .
These suggest that overexpressions of MMP-2 and MT1-MMP , loss of TIMP-2 expression , and up-regulation of beta-catenin by AAC-11 transfection may contribute to the development of cervical cancer invasion .
AAC-11 gene transfection increased cervical cancer cell colonization .
The effect of AAC-11 on cultured cervical cancer cells was associated with antiapoptotic process .
Approximately 50 % of the AAC-11 transfected cells in serum-free medium died after 2 weeks , compared to 1 week for vector alone or wild-type cells .
These results suggest that AAC-11 may serve as a candidate metastasis-related and apoptosis-inhibiting gene in human cervical cancer .
Membrane-type 6 matrix metalloproteinase (MT6-MMP, MMP-25) is the second glycosyl-phosphatidyl inositol (GPI)-anchored MMP.
A recently identified membrane-type 6 matrix metalloproteinase ( MT6-MMP ) has a hydrophobic stretch of 24 amino acids at the C-terminus .
This hydrophobicity pattern is similar to glycosyl-phosphatidyl inositol ( GPI ) - anchored MMP , MT4-MMP , and other GPI-anchored proteins .
Thus , we tested the possibility that MT6-MMP was also a GPI-anchored proteinase .
Our results showed that MT6-MMP as well as MT4-MMP were labeled with ( 3H ) ethanolamine indicating the presence of a GPI unit with incorporated label .
In addition , phosphatidyl inositol-specific phospholipase C treatment released MT6-MMP from the surface of transfected cells .
These results strongly indicate that MT6-MMP is a GPI-anchored protein .
Since two members of MT-MMPs are now assigned as GPI-anchored proteinase , MT-MMPs can be subgrouped into GPI type and transmembrane type .
The orthologous human and murine semaphorin 6A-1 proteins (SEMA6A-1/Sema6A-1) bind to the enabled/vasodilator-stimulated phosphoprotein-like protein (EVL) via a novel carboxyl-terminal zyxin-like domain.
Neuronal development and apoptosis critically depend on the transformation of extracellular signals to intracellular actions resulting in cytoskeletal rearrangements .
Ena\/VASP ( enabled\/vasodilator-stimulated phosphoprotein ) proteins play an important role in actin and filament dynamics , whereas members of the semaphorin protein family are guidance signals in embryo - and organogenesis .
Here , we report the identification of two novel transmembranous human and murine semaphorins , ( HSA ) SEMA6A-1 and ( MMU ) Sema6A-1 .
These semaphorin 6 variants directly link the Ena\/VASP and the semaphorin protein family , since SEMA6A-1 \/ Sema6A-1 is capable of a selective binding to the protein EVL ( Ena\/VASP-like protein ) .
EVL is the third member of the Ena\/VASP family of proteins that was identified sharing the same structural features as Mena ( mammalian enabled ) and VASP , although its functionality seems to be different from that of the other members .
Here we demonstrate that SEMA6A-1 \/ Sema6A-1 is colocalized with EVL via its zyxin-like carboxyl-terminal domain that contains a modified binding motif , which further stresses the existence of functional differences between EVL and Mena\/VASP .
In addition these findings suggest a completely new role for transmembranous semaphorins such as SEMA6A-1 \/ Sema6A-1 in retrograde signaling .
Physical interaction between hepatitis C virus NS4B protein and CREB-RP/ATF6beta.
By using a yeast two-hybrid assay , cyclic AMP-response-element-binding protein-related protein ( CREB-RP ) , also called activating transcription factor 6beta ( ATF6beta ) , was identified as a cellular protein that interacts with the NS4B protein of hepatitis C virus .
An N-terminal half of NS4B and a central portion of CREB-RP\/ATF6beta containing the basic leucine zipper ( bZIP ) domain were involved in the interaction .
The interaction between NS4B and CREB-RP\/ATF6beta was demonstrated also in mammalian cells by co-immunoprecipitation and confocal microscopic analyses using specific antibodies .
The bZIP domain of ATF6alpha , which shares high sequence similarity with CREB-RP\/ATF6beta , was also shown to interact with NS4B in yeast although the interaction was weaker than that between NS4B and CREB-RP\/ATF6beta .
CREB-RP\/ATF6beta and ATF6alpha are known as endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) stress-induced transcription factors .
Collectively , our results imply the possibility that NS4B modulates certain cellular responses upon ER stress through the physical interaction with CREB-RP\/ATF6beta and ATF6alpha .
K+ channel activation by all three isoforms of serum- and glucocorticoid-dependent protein kinase SGK.
The serum - and glucocorticoid-dependent kinase SGK1 was originally identified as a glucocorticoid-sensitive gene .
Subsequently , the two homologous kinases SGK2 and SGK3 have been cloned , being products of distinct genes , which are differentially expressed and share 80 % identity in amino acid sequence in their catalytic domains .
While SGK1 has been shown to activate ion channels , including K ( + ) channels , the functions of SGK2 and SGK3 have not been examined .
The present study was therefore performed to elucidate the effect of SGK1 , SGK2 , and SGK3 on electrical properties of renal epithelial cells .
To this end human embryonic kidney ( HEK293 ) cells were transfected with the kinases and ion-channel activity determined using the patch-clamp technique .
In non-transfected cells and in cells transfected with the empty GFP construct a voltage-gated K ( + ) current was observed amounting to 303 + \/ -19 pA ( n = 13 ) and 299 + \/ -29 pA ( n = 23 ) , respectively .
Transfection with SGK1 , SGK2 or SGK3 increased the voltage-gated K ( + ) current to 1056 + \/ -152 pA ( n = 17 ) , 555 + \/ -47 pA ( n = 17 ) , and 775 + \/ -98 pA ( n = 16 ) , respectively .
The K ( + ) current was fully blocked by 3 mM tetraethylammonium chloride and inhibited 45 % by the Kv1 channel blocker margatoxin ( 10 nM ) .
In dual electrode voltage-clamp experiments SGK isoforms up-regulated Kv1 voltage-gated K ( + ) channels expressed in Xenopus laevis oocytes .
The present observations thus reveal a powerful stimulating effect of all three isoforms of SGK on K ( + ) channels .
Those effects may participate in regulation of epithelial transport , cell proliferation , and neuromuscular excitability .
Expression and localization of VCX/Y proteins and their possible involvement in regulation of ribosome assembly during spermatogenesis.
Variable Charge X\/Y ( VCX\/Y ) is a human testis-specific gene family that localized on X and Y chromosomes .
In this study , VCY protein was expressed in E. coli in the form of glutathione-S-transferase ( GST ) fusion protein .
With the purified fusion protein as antigen , the anti-GST-VCY antibody was generated and the localization of VCY protein in human testis was determined by immunohistochemistry .
In the testis seminiferous epithelium , VCY proteins were highly expressed in nuclei of germ cells .
Using propidium iodide staining and green fluorescent protein ( GFP ) tag technologies , VCY and VCX-8r proteins were mainly localized in the nucleoli of COS7 cells .
In addition , the colocalization for VCY and VCX-8r in COS7 cells was also observed .
With VCY cDNA as bait , a cDNA fragment of acidic ribosomal protein PO was obtained using yeast two-hybrid system .
All the information above indicates that VCX\/Y protein family might be involved in the regulation of ribosome assembly during spermatogenesis .
A protein interaction framework for human mRNA degradation.
The degradation of mRNA is an important regulatory step in the control of gene expression .
However , mammalian RNA decay pathways remain poorly characterized .
To provide a framework for studying mammalian RNA decay , a two-hybrid protein interaction map was generated using 54 constructs from 38 human proteins predicted to function in mRNA decay .
The results provide evidence for interactions between many different proteins required for mRNA decay .
Of particular interest are interactions between the poly ( A ) ribonuclease and the exosome and between the Lsm complex , decapping factors , and 5 ' -- ) 3 ' exonucleases .
Moreover , multiple interactions connect 5 ' -- ) 3 ' and 3 ' -- ) 5 ' decay proteins to each other and to nonsense-mediated decay factors , providing the opportunity for coordination between decay pathways .
The interaction network also predicts the internal organization of the exosome and Lsm complexes .
Additional interactions connect mRNA decay factors to many novel proteins and to proteins required for other steps in gene expression .
These results provide an experimental insight into the organization of proteins required for mRNA decay and their coupling to other cellular processes , and the physiological relevance of many of these interactions are supported by their evolutionary conservation .
The interactions also provide a wealth of hypotheses to guide future research on mRNA degradation and demonstrate the power of exhaustive protein interaction mapping in aiding understanding of uncharacterized protein complexes and pathways .
Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 cleavage during apoptosis: an update.
Poly ( ADP-ribosylation ) is a post-translational modification of proteins playing a crucial role in many processes , including DNA repair and cell death .
The best known poly ( ADP-ribosylating ) enzyme , PARP-1 , is a DNA nick sensor and uses betaNAD ( + ) to form polymers of ADP-ribose which are further bound to nuclear protein acceptors .
To strictly regulate poly ( ADP-ribose ) turnover , its degradation is assured by the enzyme poly ( ADP-ribose ) glycohydrolase ( PARG ) .
During apoptosis , PARP-1 plays two opposite roles : its stimulation leads to poly ( ADP-ribose ) synthesis , whereas caspases cause PARP-1 cleavage and inactivation .
PARP-1 proteolysis produces an 89 kDa C-terminal fragment , with a reduced catalytic activity , and a 24 kDa N-terminal peptide , which retains the DNA binding domains .
The fate and the possible role of these fragments during apoptosis will be discussed .
Myoferlin, a candidate gene and potential modifier of muscular dystrophy.
Dysferlin , the gene product of the limb girdle muscular dystrophy ( LGMD ) 2B locus , encodes a membrane-associated protein with homology to Caenorhabditis elegans fer-1 .
Humans with mutations in dysferlin ( DYSF ) develop muscle weakness that affects both proximal and distal muscles .
Strikingly , the phenotype in LGMD 2B patients is highly variable , but the type of mutation in DYSF can not explain this phenotypic variability .
Through electronic database searching , we identified a protein highly homologous to dysferlin that we have named myoferlin .
Myoferlin mRNA was highly expressed in cardiac muscle and to a lesser degree in skeletal muscle .
However , antibodies raised to myoferlin showed abundant expression of myoferlin in both cardiac and skeletal muscle .
Within the cell , myoferlin was associated with the plasma membrane but , unlike dysferlin , myoferlin was also associated with the nuclear membrane .
Ferlin family members contain C2 domains , and these domains play a role in calcium-mediated membrane fusion events .
To investigate this , we studied the expression of myoferlin in the mdx mouse , which lacks dystrophin and whose muscles undergo repeated rounds of degeneration and regeneration .
We found upregulation of myoferlin at the membrane in mdx skeletal muscle .
Thus , myoferlin ( MYOF ) is a candidate gene for muscular dystrophy and cardiomyopathy , or possibly a modifier of the muscular dystrophy phenotype .
The SCA8 transcript is an antisense RNA to a brain-specific transcript encoding a novel actin-binding protein (KLHL1).
Spinocerebellar ataxia type 8 ( SCA8 ) is a neurodegenerative disorder caused by the expansion of a CTG trinucleotide repeat that is transcribed as part of an untranslated RNA .
As a step towards understanding the molecular pathology of SCA8 , we have defined the genomic organization of the SCA8 RNA transcripts and assembled a 166 kb segment of genomic sequence containing the repeat .
The most striking feature of the SCA8 transcripts is that the most 5 ' exon is transcribed through the first exon of another gene that is transcribed in the opposite orientation .
This gene arrangement suggests that the SCA8 transcript is an endogenous antisense RNA that overlaps the transcription and translation start sites as well as the first splice donor sequence of the sense gene .
The sense transcript encodes a 748 amino acid protein with a predicted domain structure typical of a family of actin-organizing proteins related to the Drosophila Kelch gene , and so has been given the name Kelch-like 1 ( KLHL1 ) .
We have identified the full-length cDNA sequence for both the human and mouse KLHLI genes , and have elucidated the general genomic organization of the human gene .
The predicted open reading frame and promoter region are highly conserved , and both genes are primarily expressed in specific brain tissues , including the cerebellum , the tissue most affected by SCA8 .
Transfection studies with epitope-tagged KLHL1 demonstrate that the protein localizes to the cytoplasm , suggesting that it may play a role in organizing the actin cytoskeleton of the brain cells in which it is expressed .
C1qRP is a heavily O-glycosylated cell surface protein involved in the regulation of phagocytic activity.
C1q , mannose-binding lectin ( MBL ) , and pulmonary surfactant protein A ( SPA ) interact with human monocytes and macrophages , resulting in the enhancement of phagocytosis of suboptimally opsonized targets .
mAbs that recognize a cell surface molecule of 126,000 Mr , designated C1qRP , have been shown to inhibit C1q - and MBL-mediated enhancement of phagocytosis .
Similar inhibition of the SPA-mediated enhancement of phagocytosis by these mAbs now suggests that C1qRP is a common component of a receptor for these macromolecules .
Ligation of human monocytes with immobilized R3 , a IgM mAb recognizing C1qRP , also triggers enhanced phagocytic capacity of these cells in the absence of ligand , verifying the direct involvement of this polypeptide in the regulation of phagocytosis .
While the cDNA for C1qRP encodes a 631 amino acid membrane protein , Chinese hamster ovary cells transfected with the cDNA of the C1qRP coding region express a surface glycoprotein with the identical 126,000 Mr in SDS-PAGE as the native C1qRP .
Use of glycosylation inhibitors , cleavage of the mature C1qRP with specific glycosidases , and in vitro translation of C1qRP cDNA demonstrated that both posttranslational glycosylation and the nature of the amino acid sequence of the protein contribute to the difference between its predicted m.w. and its migration on SDS-PAGE .
These results verify that the cDNA cloned codes for the mature C1qRP , that C1qRP contains a relatively high degree of O-linked glycoslyation , and that C1qRP cross-linked directly by monoclonal anti-C1qRP or engaged as a result of cell surface ligation of SPA , as well as C1q and MBL , enhances phagocytosis .
Leukolysin/MMP25/MT6-MMP: a novel matrix metalloproteinase specifically expressed in the leukocyte lineage.
A novel matrix metalloproteinase ( MMP ) was identified from leukocytes and found to be specifically expressed by peripheral blood leukocytes among 29 different tissues examined .
Named leukolysin , it encodes for 562 residues with a conserved MMP structure , i.e. , pre - , pro- , catalytic , hinge - and hemopexin-like domains , but also a RXK\/RR motif , known for its role in MMP zymogen activation , and a C-terminal hydrophobic segment .
Overall , leukolysin displays the strongest homology to the newly identified MT-MMP subgroup with 45 % and 39 % identities to MT4 - and MT1-MMPs vs 30 % and 31.5 % to MMP1 and 3 respectively .
Unlike MT4-MMP whose proteolytic activity remains undefined , a C-terminally truncated leukolysin is expressed as a strong gelatinolytic species at 28 kDa which is derived from a cell-associated 34 kDa proenzyme , presumably by furin or proprotein convertase mediated removal of the propeptide ( approximately 6 kDa ) .
By green fluorescent protein ( GFP ) tagging , the intracellular proenzyme is localized to granules throughout the cell , suggesting that activation occur immediately prior to secretion .
Taken together , leukolysin may be part of the proteolytic arsenal deployed by leukocytes during inflammatory responses .
Molecular cloning of a novel MMP : MMP :25
ULBPs, novel MHC class I-related molecules, bind to CMV glycoprotein UL16 and stimulate NK cytotoxicity through the NKG2D receptor.
The human cytomegalovirus glycoprotein , UL16 , binds to two members of a novel family of molecules , the ULBPs , and to the MHC class I homolog , MICB .
The ULBPs are GPI-linked glycoproteins belonging to the extended MHC class I family but are only distantly related to MICB .
The ULBP and MICB molecules are ligands for the activating receptor , NKG2D\/DAP10 , and this interaction is blocked by a soluble form of UL16 .
The ULBPs stimulate cytokine and chemokine production from NK cells , and expression of ULBPs in NK cell-resistant target cells confers susceptibility to NK cell cytotoxicity .
Masking of NK cell recognition of ULBP or MIC antigens by UL16 provides a potential mechanism by which human cytomegalovirus-infected cells might evade attack by the immune system .
Functional characterization of novel human ARFGAP3.
ADP ribosylation factors ( ARFs ) are critical in the vesicular trafficking pathway .
ARF activity is controlled by GTPase-activating proteins ( GAPs ) .
We have identified recently a novel tentative ARF GAP derived from human fetal liver , ARFGAP3 ( originally named as ARFGAP1 ) .
In the present study , we demonstrated that ARFGAP3 had GAP activity in vitro and remarked that the GAP activity of ARFGAP3 was regulated by phospholipids , i.e. phosphatidylinositol 4,5-diphosphate as agonist and phosphatidylcholine as antagonist .
ARFGAP3 is a predominantly cytosolic protein , and concentrated in the perinuclear region .
Its transient ectopic overexpression in cultured mammalian cells reduced the constitutive secretion of secreted alkaline phosphatase , indicating that ectopic overexpression of ARFGAP3 inhibits the early secretory pathway of proteins in vivo .
These results demonstrated that ARFGAP3 is a novel GAP for ARF1 and might be involved in intracellular traffic of proteins and vesicular transport as predicted .
Family of human oxysterol binding protein (OSBP) homologues. A novel member implicated in brain sterol metabolism.
Oxysterol binding protein ( OSBP ) is a cytosolic protein that undergoes ligand-induced binding to the Golgi apparatus and has been implicated in the regulation of cellular cholesterol metabolism .
In the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae an OSBP homolog is involved in membrane trafficking through the Golgi complex .
Prompted by the multitude of OSBP-related genes in the yeast genome , we carried out a search for human expressed sequence tags ( ESTs ) displaying homology to the sterol-binding domain of OSBP .
This revealed a minimum of six novel OSBP-related proteins , designated ORP-1 to ORP-6 .
ORP cDNA probes were generated by reverse transcription-PCR from human liver mRNA , and used for Northern blot analysis of human tissue transcript panels .
This verified that each of them represents a different gene product and showed that they display distinct tissue-specific expression patterns .
The ORP-1 and -2 mRNA expression levels were similar to or higher than that of OSBP while the ORP-3 to -6 mRNAs were detected at lower levels in specific tissues .
The most abundantly expressed new gene , ORP-1 , was transcribed at strikingly high levels in the cortical areas of human brain and displayed sterol-regulated expression in a cultured human neuroblastoma cell line .
This indicates that ORP-1 may play an important role in maintaining the sterol balance in cells of the central nervous system .
Together with OSBP , the identified gene products constitute a novel human protein family that may provide a link between organellar sterol status and membrane dynamics .
Molecular cloning of a human, hemicholinium-3-sensitive choline transporter.
Under many physiological circumstances , Na ( + ) - and Cl ( - ) - dependent , hemicholinium-3 ( HC-3 ) - sensitive , high-affinity choline uptake ( HACU ) in cholinergic neurons is thought to be rate-limiting in the biosynthesis of acetylcholine ( ACh ) .
Based on sequence information provided by the Human Genome Project and the recently reported rat CHT1 ( rCHT1 ) , we cloned a human CHT cDNA from spinal cord .
The hCHT cDNA encodes a protein of 580 amino acids having 93 % identity to rCHT1 and 51 % identity to the Caenorhabditis elegans homolog CHO-1 , and is distantly related to members of the Na ( + ) - coupled glucose transporter ( SGLT ) gene family of Na ( + ) - coupled glucose ( SGLT ) , nucleoside and iodide transporters .
Northern blot analysis reveals the expression of a approximately 5 kb transcript in human brain regions rich in cholinergic neurons including the putamen , spinal cord , and medulla .
Expression of hCHT cDNA in COS-7 cells results in saturable , Na ( + ) \/ Cl ( - ) - dependent choline uptake ( K ( m ) = 1.2 microM ) in membrane vesicles and ( ( 3 ) H ) HC-3 binding ( K ( d ) = 4 nM ) in membrane fractions , consistent with characteristics reported in mammalian cholinergic neurons .
Using radiation hybrid mapping techniques , we localized the hCHT gene to human chromosome 2q12 .
These studies elucidate the primary structure and chromosomal localization of hCHT and provide a basis for mechanistic analysis of HACU regulation and an investigation of the role of hCHT in disease states .
Interleukin 21 and its receptor are involved in NK cell expansion and regulation of lymphocyte function.
Cytokines are important in the regulation of hematopoiesis and immune responses , and can influence lymphocyte development .
Here we have identified a class I cytokine receptor that is selectively expressed in lymphoid tissues and is capable of signal transduction .
The full-length receptor was expressed in BaF3 cells , which created a functional assay for ligand detection and cloning .
Conditioned media from activated human CD3 + T cells supported proliferation of the assay cell line .
We constructed a complementary DNA expression library from activated human CD3 + T cells , and identified a cytokine with a four-helix-bundle structure using functional cloning .
This cytokine is most closely related to IL2 and IL15 , and has been designated IL21 with the receptor designated IL21 R. In vitro assays suggest that IL21 has a role in the proliferation and maturation of natural killer ( NK ) cell populations from bone marrow , in the proliferation of mature B-cell populations co-stimulated with anti-CD40 , and in the proliferation of T cells co-stimulated with anti-CD3 .
Molecular cloning, chromosomal localization, tissue mRNA levels, bacterial expression, and enzymatic properties of human NMN adenylyltransferase.
A 1329-base pair clone isolated from a human placenta cDNA library contains a full-length 837-base pair coding region for a 31.9-kDa protein whose deduced primary structure exhibits high homology to consensus sequences found in other NMN adenylyltransferases .
Northern blotting detected a major 3.1-kilobase mRNA transcript as well as a minor 4.1-kilobase transcript in all human tissues examined .
In several cancer cell lines , lower levels of mRNA expression were clearly evident .
The gene encoding the human enzyme was mapped to chromosome band 1p32-35 .
High efficiency bacterial expression yielded 1.5 mg of recombinant enzyme\/liter of culture medium .
The molecular and kinetic properties of recombinant human NMN adenylyltransferase provide new directions for investigating metabolic pathways involving this enzyme .
WNK1 phosphorylates synaptotagmin 2 and modulates its membrane binding.
WNK ( with no lysine ( K ) ) protein kinases were named for their unique active site organization .
Mutations in WNK1 and WNK4 cause a familial form of hypertension by undefined mechanisms .
Here , we report that WNK1 selectively binds to and phosphorylates synaptotagmin 2 ( Syt2 ) within its calcium binding C2 domains .
Endogenous WNK1 and Syt2 coimmunoprecipitate and colocalize on a subset of secretory granules in INS-1 cells .
Phosphorylation by WNK1 increases the amount of Ca2 + required for Syt2 binding to phospholipid vesicles ; mutation of threonine 202 , a WNK1 phosphorylation site , partially prevents this change .
These findings suggest that phosphorylation of Syts by WNK1 can regulate Ca2 + sensing and the subsequent Ca2 + - dependent interactions mediated by Syt C2 domains .
These findings provide a biochemical mechanism that could lead to the retention or insertion of proteins in the plasma membrane .
Interruption of this regulatory pathway may disturb membrane events that regulate ion balance .
The netrin-G1 ligand NGL-1 promotes the outgrowth of thalamocortical axons.
Netrin-G1 is a lipid-anchored protein that is structurally related to the netrin family of axon guidance molecules .
Netrin-G1 does not bind any of the known netrin receptors and its function is not known .
Here we identify human netrin-G1 ligand ( NGL-1 ) , a transmembrane protein containing leucine-rich repeat ( LRR ) and immunoglobulin ( Ig ) domains that specifically interacts with netrin-G1 through its LRR region .
Whereas netrin-G1 is expressed highly in mouse thalamic axons , NGL-1 is most abundant in the striatum and the cerebral cortex -- the intermediate and final targets , respectively , of thalamocortical axons ( TCAs ) .
Surface-bound NGL-1 stimulates , but soluble NGL-1 disrupts , the growth of embryonic thalamic axons , and in vitro data indicate that NGL-1 activity may be mediated at least partially by netrin-G1 .
Our findings provide evidence that netrin-G1 functions as an important component of the NGL-1 receptor to promote TCA outgrowth and that membrane-bound netrins can participate in receiving axonal signaling pathways .
Enzymes of the SUMO modification pathway localize to filaments of the nuclear pore complex.
SUMOs are small ubiquitin-related polypeptides that are reversibly conjugated to many nuclear proteins .
Although the number of identified substrates has grown rapidly , relatively little is still understood about when , where , and why most proteins are modified by SUMO .
Here , we demonstrate that enzymes involved in the SUMO modification and demodification of proteins are components of the nuclear pore complex ( NPC ) .
We show that SENP2 , a SUMO protease that is able to demodify both SUMO-1 and SUMO-2 or SUMO-3 protein conjugates , localizes to the nucleoplasmic face of the NPC .
The unique amino-terminal domain of SENP2 interacts with the FG repeat domain of Nup153 , indicating that SENP2 associates with the nucleoplasmic basket of the NPC .
We also investigated the localization of the SUMO conjugating enzyme , Ubc9 .
Using immunogold labeling of isolated nuclear envelopes , we found that Ubc9 localizes to both the cytoplasmic and the nucleoplasmic filaments of the NPC .
In vitro binding studies revealed that Ubc9 and SUMO-1-modified RanGAP1 bind synergistically to form a trimeric complex with a component of the cytoplasmic filaments of the NPC , Nup358 .
Our results indicate that both SUMO modification and demodification of proteins may occur at the NPC and suggest a connection between the SUMO modification pathway and nucleocytoplasmic transport .
Composition of Drosophila melanogaster proteome involved in fucosylated glycan metabolism.
The whole genome approach enables the characterization of all components of any given biological pathway .
Moreover , it can help to uncover all the metabolic routes for any molecule .
Here we have used the genome of Drosophila melanogaster to search for enzymes involved in the metabolism of fucosylated glycans .
Our results suggest that in the fruit fly GDP-fucose , the donor for fucosyltransferase reactions , is formed exclusively via the de novo pathway from GDP-mannose through enzymatic reactions catalyzed by GDP-D-mannose 4,6-dehydratase ( GMD ) and GDP-4-keto-6-deoxy-D-mannose 3,5-epimerase \/ 4-reductase ( GMER , also known as FX in man ) .
The Drosophila genome does not have orthologs for the salvage pathway enzymes , i.e. fucokinase and GDP-fucose pyrophosphorylase synthesizing GDP-fucose from fucose .
In addition we identified two novel fucosyltransferases predicted to catalyze alpha1 ,3 - and alpha1,6-specific linkages to the GlcNAc residues on glycans .
No genes with the capacity to encode alpha1,2-specific fucosyltransferases were found .
We also identified two novel genes coding for O-fucosyltransferases and a gene responsible for a fucosidase enzyme in the Drosophila genome .
Finally , using the Drosophila CG4435 gene , we identified two novel human genes putatively coding for fucosyltransferases .
This work can serve as a basis for further whole-genome approaches in mapping all possible glycosylation pathways and as a basic analysis leading to subsequent experimental studies to verify the predictions made in this work .
A new spectrin, beta IV, has a major truncated isoform that associates with promyelocytic leukemia protein nuclear bodies and the nuclear matrix.
We isolated cDNAs that encode a 77-kDa peptide similar to repeats 10-16 of beta-spectrins .
Its gene localizes to human chromosome 19q13.13-q13 .2 and mouse chromosome 7 , at 7.5 centimorgans .
A 289-kDa isoform , similar to full-length beta-spectrins , was partially assembled from sequences in the human genomic DNA data base and completely cloned and sequenced .
RNA transcripts are seen predominantly in the brain , and Western analysis shows a major peptide that migrates as a 72-kDa band .
This new gene , spectrin betaIV , thus encodes a full-length minor isoform ( SpbetaIVSigma1 ) and a truncated major isoform ( SpbetaIVSigma5 ) .
Immunostaining of cells shows a micropunctate pattern in the cytoplasm and nucleus .
In mesenchymal stem cells , the staining concentrates at nuclear dots that stain positively for the promyelocytic leukemia protein ( PML ) .
Expression of SpbetaIVSigma5 fused to green fluorescence protein in cells produces nuclear dots that include all PML bodies , which double in number in transfected cells .
Deletion analysis shows that partial repeats 10 and 16 of SpbetaIVSigma5 are necessary for nuclear dot formation .
Immunostaining of whole-mount nuclear matrices reveals diffuse positivity with accentuation at PML bodies .
Spectrin betaIV is the first beta-spectrin associated with a subnuclear structure and may be part of a nuclear scaffold to which gene regulatory machinery binds .
Human p32, interacts with B subunit of the CCAAT-binding factor, CBF/NF-Y, and inhibits CBF-mediated transcription activation in vitro.
To understand the role of the CCAAT-binding factor , CBF , in transcription , we developed a strategy to purify the heterotrimeric CBF complex from HeLa cell extracts using two successive immunoaffinity chromatography steps .
Here we show that the p32 protein , previously identified as the ASF\/SF2 splicing factor-associated protein , copurified with the CBF complex .
Studies of protein-protein interaction demonstrated that p32 interacts specifically with CBF-B subunit and also associates with CBF-DNA complex .
Cellular localization by immunofluorescence staining revealed that p32 is present in the cell throughout the cytosol and nucleus , whereas CBF is present primarily in the nucleus .
A portion of the p32 colocalizes with CBF-B in the nucleus .
Interestingly , reconstitution of p32 in an in vitro transcription reaction demonstrated that p32 specifically inhibits CBF-mediated transcription activation .
Altogether , our study identified p32 as a novel and specific corepressor of CBF-mediated transcription activation in vitro .
Identification of two prokineticin cDNAs: recombinant proteins potently contract gastrointestinal smooth muscle.
The motility of gastrointestinal tract is regulated by classical neurotransmitters , neuropeptides , and humoral agents .
Two novel human cDNAs have been cloned based on their sequence similarity to a frog skin secretion protein , Bv8 , and a nontoxic protein of mamba snake venom .
These human cDNAs encode two secreted proteins of 86 and 81 amino acids .
Northern blot hybridization has revealed that these cDNAs are expressed in gastrointestinal tract , particularly the stomach .
Recombinant proteins with authentic N-terminal sequences have been produced in Escherichia coli and refolded into functional proteins by careful control of protein aggregation .
Mass spectrometry has confirmed the formation of five pairs of disulfide bonds .
The refolded recombinant proteins potently contract gastrointestinal smooth muscle with EC ( 50 ) values in the subnanomolar range .
The contractile effects of the recombinant proteins are specific for gastrointestinal smooth muscle , because they have no effect on vascular or respiratory smooth muscle .
To reflect their potent and specific effects on gastrointestinal smooth muscle cells , we have named these recombinant proteins prokineticins .
Ligand binding studies with iodinated prokineticin revealed the presence of a high-affinity site in ileal smooth muscle .
The displacement of specific binding by GTP gamma S suggests that the prokineticin receptor may belong to the family of G protein-coupled receptors .
Experiments with verapamil and nifedipine revealed that calcium influx is essential for the contractile activity of prokineticins on gastrointestinal smooth muscle .
In summary , we have identified two novel endogenous regulators of gastrointestinal motility .
The availability of recombinant prokineticins should provide novel therapeutic agents for disorders involving impaired gastrointestinal motility .
Nhp2p and Nop10p are essential for the function of H/ACA snoRNPs.
The small nucleolar ribonucleoprotein particles containing H\/ACA-type snoRNAs ( H\/ACA snoRNPs ) are crucial trans-acting factors intervening in eukaryotic ribosome biogenesis .
Most of these particles generate the site-specific pseudouridylation of rRNAs while a subset are required for 18S rRNA synthesis .
To understand in detail how these particles carry out these functions , all of their protein components have to be characterized .
For that purpose , we have affinity-purified complexes containing epitope-tagged Gar1p protein , previously shown to be part of H\/ACA snoRNPs .
Under the conditions used , three polypeptides of 65 , 22 and 10 kDa apparent molecular weight specifically copurify with epitope-tagged Gar1p .
The 22 and 10 kDa polypeptides were identified as Nhp2p and a novel protein we termed Nop10p , respectively .
Both proteins are conserved , essential and present in the dense fibrillar component of the nucleolus .
Nhp2p and Nop10p are specifically associated with all H\/ACA snoRNAs and are essential to the function of H\/ACA snoRNPs .
Cells lacking Nhp2p or Nop10p are impaired in global rRNA pseudouridylation and in the A1 and A2 cleavage steps of the pre-rRNA required for the synthesis of mature 18S rRNA .
These phenotypes are probably a direct consequence of the instability of H\/ACA snoRNAs and Gar1p observed in cells deprived of Nhp2p or Nop10p .
Our results suggest that Nhp2p and Nop10p , together with Cbf5p , constitute the core of H\/ACA snoRNPs .
Tollip, a new component of the IL-1RI pathway, links IRAK to the IL-1 receptor.
Interleukin-1 ( IL-1 ) is a proinflammatory cytokine that elicits its pleiotropic effects through activation of the transcription factors NF-kappaB and AP-1 .
Binding of IL-1 to its receptor results in rapid assembly of a membrane-proximal signalling complex that consists of two different receptor chains ( IL-1Rs ) , IL-1RI and IL-1RAcP , the adaptor protein MyD88 , the serine\/threonine kinase IRAK and a new protein , which we have named Tollip .
Here we show that , before IL-1beta treatment , Tollip is present in a complex with IRAK , and that recruitment of Tollip-IRAK complexes to the activated receptor complex occurs through association of Tollip with IL-1RAcP .
Co-recruited MyD88 then triggers IRAK autophosphorylation , which in turn leads to rapid dissociation of IRAK from Tollip ( and IL-1Rs ) .
As overexpression of Tollip results in impaired NF-kappaB activation , we conclude that Tollip is an important constituent of the IL-1R signalling pathway .
Excessive placental secretion of neurokinin B during the third trimester causes pre-eclampsia.
Pre-eclampsia is a principal cause of maternal morbidity and mortality , affecting 5-10 % of first pregnancies worldwide .
Manifestations include increased blood pressure , proteinuria , coagulopathy and peripheral and cerebral oedema .
Although the aetiology and pathogenesis remain to be elucidated , the placenta is undoubtedly involved , as termination of pregnancy eradicates the disease .
Here we have cloned a complementary DNA from human placental messenger RNA encoding a precursor protein of 121 amino acids which gives rise to a mature peptide identical to the neuropeptide neurokinin B ( NKB ) of other mammalian species .
In female rats , concentrations of NKB several-fold above that of an animal 20 days into pregnancy caused substantial pressor activity .
In human pregnancy , the expression of NKB was confined to the outer syncytiotrophoblast of the placenta , significant concentrations of NKB could be detected in plasma as early as week 9 , and plasma concentrations of NKB were grossly elevated in pregnancy-induced hypertension and pre-eclampsia .
We conclude that elevated levels of NKB in early pregnancy may be an indicator of hypertension and pre-eclampsia , and that treatment with certain neurokinin receptor antagonists may be useful in alleviating the symptoms .
Phylogenetic conservation of the makorin-2 gene, encoding a multiple zinc-finger protein, antisense to the RAF1 proto-oncogene.
Natural endogenous antisense RNAs have been reported in multiple loci , with evidence in some cases supporting a regulatory role for the antisense transcript .
Here , we describe a novel gene , makorin RING zinc finger-2 ( MKRN2 ) , that overlaps and is antisense to the gene RAF1 in mammals .
Phylogenetic analysis of the 3 ' untranslated region of RAF1 orthologues suggests that this relationship may have existed for up to 450 million years .
We have also identified MKRN2 orthologues in two species of fish .
This places the gene duplication event that created this locus from an ancestral MKRN1 gene early in vertebrate evolution , over 450 million years ago .
Northern blot analyses show that human MKRN2 and RAF1 are co-expressed in tissues and cell lines , raising the possibility of mRNA duplex formation .
The encoded makorin-2 protein is likely a ribonucleoprotein of unknown function , but its conservation suggests an important cellular role .
The data presented here describe a conserved vertebrate MKRN2 gene that is closely associated with the RAF1 locus .
Brain-specific expression of a novel human UDP-GalNAc:polypeptide N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase (GalNAc-T9).
We isolated cDNA coding for the ninth of the UDP-GalNAc : polypeptide N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferases ( GalNAc-T9 ) from human brain by the polymerase chain reaction .
The polypeptide encoded by GalNAc-T9 contained the structural features characteristic of GalNAc transferases , such as a GT1 motif , a Gal\/GalNAc transferase motif , ( QXW ) ( 3 ) repeats , and conserved His , Cys , and acidic amino acid residues .
Northern blot analysis revealed the mRNA expression of the enzyme to be confined to the brain .
The brain-specific expression of GalNAc-T9 suggested that this isozyme catalyzes O-glycosylation in the brain .
Myotilin, a novel sarcomeric protein with two Ig-like domains, is encoded by a candidate gene for limb-girdle muscular dystrophy.
The striated muscle sarcomeres are highly organized structures composed of actin ( thin ) and myosin ( thick ) filaments that slide past each other during contraction .
The integrity of sarcomeres is controlled by a set of structural proteins , among which are titin , a giant molecule that contains several immunoglobulin ( Ig ) - like domains and associates with thin and thick filaments , and ( alpha ) - actinin , an actin cross-linking protein .
Mutations in several sarcomeric and sarcolemmal proteins have been shown to result in muscular dystrophy and cardiomyopathy .
On the other hand , the disease genes underlying several disease forms remain to be identified .
Here we describe a novel 57 kDa cytoskeletal protein , myotilin .
Its N-terminal sequence is unique , but the C-terminal half contains two Ig-like domains homologous to titin .
Myotilin is expressed in skeletal and cardiac muscle , it co-localizes with ( alpha ) - actinin in the sarcomeric I -- bands and directly interacts with ( alpha ) - actinin .
The human myotilin gene maps to chromosome 5q31 between markers AFM350yB1 and D5S500 .
The locus of a dominantly inherited limb-girdle muscular dystrophy ( LGMD1A ) resides in an overlapping narrow segment , and a new type of distal myopathy with vocal cord and pharyngeal weakness ( VCPMD ) has been mapped to the same locus .
The muscle specificity and apparent role as a sarcomeric structural protein raise the possibility that defects in the myotilin gene may cause muscular dystrophy .
LRP-DIT, a putative endocytic receptor gene, is frequently inactivated in non-small cell lung cancer cell lines.
A variety of studies suggest that allelic losses at chromosome 2q are associated with aggressive behavior of various forms of human neoplasia .
Using a probe to detect homozygous deletions on chromosome 2q21 .2 in kidney and bladder cancer cell lines , we identified a new candidate tumor suppressor gene , lipoprotein receptor-related protein-deleted in tumors ( LRP-DIT ) .
The predicted LRP-DIT product of 4599 amino acids has extensive homology to a gigantic receptor , LRP1 , which mediates endocytosis of multiple proteins from the cell surface .
Homozygous deletions in LRP-DIT were detected in 17 % ( 4 of 23 ) of non-small cell lung cancer ( NSCLC ) cell lines .
The expression of only abnormal transcripts missing portions of the LRP-DIT sequence was demonstrated in an additional 30 % ( 11 of 36 ) of NSCLC lines .
Finally , a missense mutation at codon 3157 was detected in one of four NSCLC lines tested for the large open reading frame .
In contrast , no LRP-DIT alterations were identified in a major fraction of SCLC cell lines , indicating that this gene is preferentially inactivated in one histological type of lung cancer .
Our data suggest that inactivation of LRP-DIT occurs in at least 40 % of NSCLC lines and thus may play an important role in tumorigenesis of NSCLCs .
Pathway leading to correctly folded beta-tubulin.
We describe the complete beta-tubulin folding pathway .
Folding intermediates produced via ATP-dependent interaction with cytosolic chaperonin undergo a sequence of interactions with four proteins ( cofactors A , D , E , and C ) .
The postchaperonin steps in the reaction cascade do not depend on ATP or GTP hydrolysis , although GTP plays a structural role in tubulin folding .
Cofactors A and D function by capturing and stabilizing beta-tubulin in a quasi-native conformation .
Cofactor E binds to the cofactor D-beta-tubulin complex ; interaction with cofactor C then causes the release of beta-tubulin polypeptides that are committed to the native state .
Sequence analysis identifies yeast homologs of cofactors D ( cin1 ) and E ( pac2 ) , characterized by mutations that affect microtubule function .
Slit2-Mediated chemorepulsion and collapse of developing forebrain axons.
Diffusible chemorepellents play a major role in guiding developing axons toward their correct targets by preventing them from entering or steering them away from certain regions .
Genetic studies in Drosophila revealed a novel repulsive guidance system that prevents inappropriate axons from crossing the CNS midline ; this repulsive system is mediated by the Roundabout ( Robo ) receptor and its secreted ligand Slit .
In rodents , Robo and Slit are expressed in the spinal cord and Slit can repel spinal motor axons in vitro .
Here , we extend these findings into higher brain centers by showing that Robo1 and Robo2 , as well as Slit1 and Slit2 , are often expressed in complementary patterns in the developing forebrain .
Furthermore , we show that human Slit2 can repel olfactory and hippocampal axons and collapse their growth cones .
Selection of cDNAs encoding putative type II membrane proteins on the cell surface from a human full-length cDNA bank.
We have developed a simple method to test whether a hydrophobic segment near the N-terminus of a protein functions as a type II signal anchor ( SA ) in which the N-terminus faces the cytoplasm .
A cDNA fragment containing the putative SA sequence of a target clone was fused in-frame to the 5 ' end of a cDNA fragment encoding the protease domain of urokinase-type plasminogen activator ( u-PA ) .
The resulting fused gene was expressed in COS7 cells .
Fibrinolytic activity on the cell surface was measured by placing a fibrin sheet in contact with the transfected COS7 cells after removing the medium .
When the cDNA fragment encoded a SA , the fibrin sheet was lysed by the u-PA expressed on the cell surface .
The fibrinolytic activity was not detected in the culture medium , suggesting that the u-PA remains on the cell surface anchored via the SA in the membrane without being cleaved by signal peptidase .
This fibrin sheet method was successfully applied to select five novel cDNA clones encoding putative type II membrane proteins from a human full-length cDNA bank .
A family of heptahelical receptors with adhesion-like domains: a marriage between two super families.
Some G protein-coupled receptors ( GPCRs ) are regulators of cell adhesion via inside-out effector signaling pathways .
Such is the case with leukocyte chemokine receptors which stimulate intracellular second messenger pathways resulting in upregulation of integrin adhesion to ligands present in the extracellular matrix or on opposing cells resulting in chemotaxis and extravasation during immune surveillance .
Remarkably , a family of GPCRs has recently been discovered that may themselves be triggered by cell-cell or cell-matrix interactions .
Along with a canonical heptahelical membrane-spanning region , these intriguing proteins contain putative cell adhesion-like modules .
The evidence to date suggests that they are involved in lymphocyte activation , macrophage biology , synaptic exocytosis and planar polarization during organogenesis .
Isolation and characterization of PAGE-1 and GAGE-7. New genes expressed in the LNCaP prostate cancer progression model that share homology with melanoma-associated antigens.
The LNCaP progression model of human prostate cancer consists of lineage-related sublines that differ in their androgen sensitivity and metastatic potential .
A differential display polymerase chain reaction was employed to evaluate mRNA expression differences between the LNCaP sublines in order to define the differences in gene expression between the androgen-sensitive , nontumorigenic LNCaP cell line and the androgen-insensitive , metastatic LNCaP sublines , C4-2 and C4-2B .
An amplicon , BG16 .21 , was isolated that showed increased expression in the androgen-independent and metastatic LNCaP sublines , C4-2 and C4-2B .
Hybridization screening of a lambda gt11 expression library with BG16 .21 revealed two transcripts , both homologous to BG16 .21 at the 3 ' end .
A GenBankTM data base search using the GCG Wisconsin software package revealed the shorter approximately 600-bp transcript ( designated GAGE-7 ) to be a new member of the GAGE family .
The second approximately 700-bp transcript was a novel gene ( designated PAGE-1 , '' prostate associated gene '' ) with only 45 % homology to GAGE gene family members .
RNA blot analysis demonstrated that GAGE-7 mRNA was expressed at equal levels in all lineage related prostate cancer cell sublines , while PAGE-1 mRNA levels were elevated 5-fold in C4-2 and C4-2B as compared with LNCaP cells .
Neither GAGE-7 nor PAGE-1 demonstrated any regulation by androgens in the prostate cancer cell lines used in this study .
PAGE-1 and GAGE-7 expression was found to be restricted to testes ( high ) and placenta ( low ) on human multiple tissue Northern blots .
As GAGE\/MAGE antigens were reported previously to be targets for tumor-specific cytotoxic lymphocytes in melanoma , these results suggest that PAGE-1 and GAGE-7 may be related to prostate cancer progression and may serve as potential targets for novel therapies .
Characterization of human sialoadhesin, a sialic acid binding receptor expressed by resident and inflammatory macrophage populations.
Sialoadhesin is a macrophage-restricted cellular interaction molecule and a prototypic member of the Siglec family of sialic acid binding immunoglobulin ( Ig ) - like lectins .
So far , it has only been characterized in rodents .
Here , we report the molecular cloning , binding properties , and expression pattern of human sialoadhesin .
The predicted protein sequences of human and mouse sialoadhesin are about 72 % identical , with the greatest similarity in the extracellular region , which comprises 17 Ig domains in both species .
A recombinant protein consisting of the first 4 N-terminal domains of human sialoadhesin fused to the Fc region of human IgG1 mediated sialic acid-dependent binding with a specificity similar to its mouse counterpart , preferring sialic acid in the alpha2 ,3 glycosidic linkage over the alpha2 ,6 linkage .
By flow cytometry with peripheral blood leukocytes , recombinant sialoadhesin bound strongly to granulocytes with intermediate binding to monocytes , natural killer cells , B cells , and a subset of CD8 T cells .
Using antibodies raised to the recombinant protein , sialoadhesin was immunoprecipitated from the THP-1 human monocytic cell line as an approximate 200-kd glycoprotein .
The expression pattern of human sialoadhesin was found to be similar to that of the mouse receptor , being absent from monocytes and other peripheral blood leukocytes , but expressed strongly by tissue macrophages in the spleen , lymph node , bone marrow , liver , colon , and lungs .
High expression was also found on inflammatory macrophages present in affected tissues from patients with rheumatoid arthritis .
A protein interaction network links GIT1, an enhancer of huntingtin aggregation, to Huntington's disease.
Analysis of protein-protein interactions ( PPIs ) is a valuable approach for characterizing proteins of unknown function .
Here , we have developed a strategy combining library and matrix yeast two-hybrid screens to generate a highly connected PPI network for Huntington 's disease ( HD ) .
The network contains 186 PPIs among 35 bait and 51 prey proteins .
It revealed 165 new potential interactions , 32 of which were confirmed by independent binding experiments .
The network also permitted the functional annotation of 16 uncharacterized proteins and facilitated the discovery of GIT1 , a G protein-coupled receptor kinase-interacting protein , which enhances huntingtin aggregation by recruitment of the protein into membranous vesicles .
Coimmunoprecipitations and immunofluorescence studies revealed that GIT1 and huntingtin associate in mammalian cells under physiological conditions .
Moreover , GIT1 localizes to neuronal inclusions , and is selectively cleaved in HD brains , indicating that its distribution and function is altered during disease pathogenesis .
Ca2+ dependence of the Ca2+-selective TRPV6 channel.
Microfluorimetry and patch-clamp experiments were performed on TRPV6-expressing HEK cells to determine whether this Ca ( 2 + ) - sensing Ca ( 2 + ) channel is constitutively active .
Intact cells loaded with fura-2 had an elevated intracellular free Ca ( 2 + ) concentration ( ( Ca ( 2 + ) ) ( i ) ) , which decreased to the same level such as in non-transfected cells if external Ca ( 2 + ) was chelated by EGTA .
Whole cell recordings from non-transfected HEK cells and cells expressing human TRPV6 revealed the presence of a basal inward current in both types of cells when the internal solution contained 0.1 mm EGTA and 100 nm ( Ca ( 2 + ) ) ( i ) or if the cytosolic Ca ( 2 + ) buffering remained undisturbed in perforated patch-clamp experiments .
If recombinantly expressed TRPV6 forms open channels , one would expect Ca ( 2 + ) - induced current inhibition , because TRPV6 is negatively regulated by internal Ca ( 2 + ) .
However , dialyzing solutions with high ( Ca ( 2 + ) ) such as 1 microm into TRPV6-expressing cells did not block the basal inward current , which was not different from the recordings from non-transfected cells .
In contrast , dialyzing 0.5 mm EGTA into TRPV6-expressing cells readily activated Ca ( 2 + ) inward currents , which were undetectable in non-transfected cells .
Interestingly , monovalent cations permeated the TRPV6 channels under conditions where no Ca ( 2 + ) permeation was detectable , indicating that divalent cations block TRPV6 channels from the extracellular side .
Like human TRPV6 , the truncated human TRPV6 ( Delta695-725 ) , which lacks the C-terminal domain required for Ca ( 2 + ) - calmodulin binding , does not form constitutive active channels , whereas the human TRPV6 ( D542A ) , carrying a point mutation in the presumed pore region , does not function as a channel .
In summary , no constitutive open TRPV6 channels were detected in patch-clamp experiments from transfected HEK cells .
However , channel activity is highly regulated by intracellular and extracellular divalent cations .
New eukaryotic semaphorins with close homology to semaphorins of DNA viruses.
Semaphorins were initially described as a family of repulsive guidance molecules in embryonal development .
Their basic structure consists of an N-terminal signal sequence , the defining semaphorin domain ofapproximately 500 amino acids , an Ig-like domain , and a variable carboxy-terminus .
We recently described a viral semaphorin homolog encoded by the alcelaphine herpesvirus type 1 .
Less conserved , truncated homologs were also identified in poxviruses .
Here we describe new human and murine semaphorin homologs .
The respective genes were cloned and sequenced , and they were termed H-Sema-L and M-Sema-L ( HGMW-approved symbols SEMAL and Semal , respectively ) .
A multiply spliced mRNA of 3.2 kb is expressed in human placenta , spleen , thymus , and gonadal tissue .
H-Sema-L maps to chromosome 15q22.3-q23 and M-Sema-L to the homologous locus 9A3.3-B in the mouse genome .
The expression patterns and the presence of related genes in large DNA viruses suggest that this new semaphorin has a relevant function in the immune system .
Characterization of Pellino2, a substrate of IRAK1 and IRAK4.
Interleukin-1 ( IL-1 ) receptor-associated kinases ( IRAKs ) are central components of Toll\/IL -1 receptor ( TIR ) signaling pathways .
In an attempt to discover novel signal transducers in TIR signaling , we identified human Pellino2 as an interaction partner of IRAK4 .
Pellino2 interacts with kinase-active as well as kinase-inactive IRAK1 and IRAK4 .
Furthermore , Pellino2 is one of the first substrates identified for IRAK1 and IRAK4 .
Functional studies using overexpression or RNAi knock-down of Pellino2 suggest a role of Pellino2 as a scaffolding protein similar to Pellino1 .
However , unlike Pellino1 , Pellino2 does not seem to activate a specific transcription factor , but links TIR signaling to basic cellular processes .
Cloning, characterization, and localization of mouse and human SPO11.
Spo11 is a meiosis-specific protein in yeast that has been found covalently bound to DNA double-strand breaks ( DSBs ) during the early stages of meiosis .
These DSBs initiate homologous recombination , which is required for proper segregation of chromosomes and the generation of genetic diversity during meiosis .
Here we report the cloning , characterization , tissue expression , and chromosomal localization of both mouse and human homologs of Spo11 .
The putative mouse and human proteins are 82 % identical and share approximately 25 % identity with other family members .
Northern blot analysis revealed testis-specific expression for both genes , but RT-PCR results showed ubiquitous expression of at least a portion of Spo11 in mouse .
Human SPO11 was also detected in several somatic tissues .
Mouse Spo11 was localized to chromosome 2H4 , and human SPO11 was localized to chromosome 20q13.2-q13 .3 , a region amplified in some breast and ovarian tumors .
Diva, a Bcl-2 homologue that binds directly to Apaf-1 and induces BH3-independent cell death.
We have identified and characterized Diva , which is a novel regulator of apoptosis .
Sequence analysis revealed that Diva is a member of the Bcl-2 family of proteins containing Bcl-2 homology domain 1 , 2 , 3 , and 4 ( BH1 , BH2 , BH3 , and BH4 ) regions and a carboxyl-terminal hydrophobic domain .
The expression of Diva mRNA was detected in multiple embryonic tissues but was restricted to the ovary and testis in adult mice .
The expression of Diva promoted the death of 293T , Ramsey , and T47D cells as well as that of primary sensory neurons , indicating that Diva is a proapoptotic protein .
Significantly , Diva lacks critical residues in the conserved BH3 region that mediate the interaction between BH3-containing proapoptotic Bcl-2 homologs and their prosurvival binding partners .
Consistent with this , Diva did not bind to cellular Bcl-2 family members including Bcl-2 , Bcl-XL , Bcl-w , Mcl-1 , and A1\/Bfl -1 .
Furthermore , mutants of Diva lacking the BH3 region fully retained their proapoptotic activity , confirming that Diva promotes apoptosis in a BH3-independent manner .
Significantly , Diva interacted with a viral Bcl-2 homolog ( vBcl-2 ) encoded by the Kaposi 's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus .
Consistent with these associations , apoptosis induced by Diva was inhibited by vBcl-2 but not by Bcl-XL .
Importantly , Diva interacted with Apaf-1 , an adapter molecule that activates caspase-9 , a central death protease of the apoptotic pathway .
The expression of Diva inhibited the binding of Bcl-XL to Apaf-1 , as determined by immunoprecipitation assays .
Thus , Diva represents a novel type of proapoptotic Bcl-2 homolog that promotes apoptosis independently of the BH3 region through direct binding to Apaf-1 , thus preventing Bcl-XL from binding to the caspase-9 regulator Apaf-1 .
Genomic organization of the JEM-1 (BLZF1) gene on human chromosome 1q24: molecular cloning and analysis of its promoter region.
The Jem-1 ( JEM-1 , HGMW-approved symbol BLZF1 ) gene mapping to human chromosome 1q24 codes for a ubiquitously expressed 3-kb mRNA , translated in a 45-kDa nuclear protein .
Recent studies have shown a deficient expression of this gene in acute promyelocytic leukemia ( APL ) .
However , treatment with retinoids was able to upregulate JEM-1 mRNA in maturing NB4 leukemia cells .
Here , we report the characterization of the structural organization of JEM-1 .
By hybridization screening of a human genomic library derived from blood mononuclear cells , five overlapping genomic DNA clones were isolated .
These clones extend over 34 kb of the human genome and comprise the complete JEM-1 gene and a 4-kb 5 ` flanking region .
Determination of the exon-intron structure of Jem-1 revealed seven exons whose junctions with introns exhibited typical splice sequences .
A shorter transcript ( Jem-1s , 1.3 kb ) generated by exon 3 extension and polyadenylation was identified .
Its translation generated a 23-kDa protein that exhibited a cytoplasmic localization .
5 ` RACE-PCR identified a major transcription start site ( TSS ) located at 403 nt upstream of the ATG .
Computer analysis of the 1 .
8-kb 5 ` flanking region showed that it lacks a TATA box , Inr motifs or DPE motifs , but it contains a typical CCAAT box located 95 bp upstream of the TSS .
Sequencing also revealed potential cis-acting elements for multiple transcription regulators including Sp1 , GATA , C\/EBP , AP-1 , and Pu1 .
No retinoic acid receptor elements or retinoic X receptor elements were detected .
This 1.8-kb DNA sequence showed a strong constitutive promoter activity determined by a luciferase-reporter gene assay in transiently transfected HeLa cells .
Retinoids further increased luciferase expression 2.7-fold .
We demonstrated that the 1-kb distal sequence contains yet unidentified elements reducing constitutive transcription .
Thus , the maximal constitutive promoter activity was assigned to a -432 + 101 region overlapping the TSS .
These data support the idea of a constitutive expression of JEM-1 , but a negative regulation in APL released by retinoids .
Large-scale identification of mammalian proteins localized to nuclear sub-compartments.
Many nuclear components participating in related pathways appear concentrated in specific areas of the mammalian nucleus .
The importance of this organization is attested to by the dysfunction that correlates with mis-localization of nuclear proteins in human disease and cancer .
Determining the sub-nuclear localization of proteins is therefore important for understanding genome regulation and function , and it also provides clues to function for novel proteins .
However , the complexity of proteins in the mammalian nucleus is too large to tackle this on a protein by protein basis .
Large-scale approaches to determining protein function and sub-cellular localization are required .
We have used a visual gene trap screen to identify more than 100 proteins , many of which are normal , located within compartments of the mouse nucleus .
The most common discrete localizations detected are at the nucleolus and the splicing speckles and on chromosomes .
Proteins at the nuclear periphery , or in other nuclear foci , have also been identified .
Several of the proteins have been implicated in human disease or cancer , e.g. ATRX , HMGI-C , NBS1 and EWS , and the gene-trapped proteins provide a route into further understanding their function .
We find that sequence motifs are often shared amongst proteins co-localized within the same sub-nuclear compartment .
Conversely , some generally abundant motifs are lacking from the proteins concentrated in specific areas of the nucleus .
This suggests that we may be able to predict sub-nuclear localization for proteins in databases based on their sequence .
Characterization of ABCB9, an ATP binding cassette protein associated with lysosomes.
We have cloned full-length human and mouse cDNAs of ABCB9 , which encodes a predicted multiple-spanning transmembrane domain and a nucleotide-binding domain with Walker motifs .
It is therefore designated as a '' half '' ATP binding cassette ( ABC ) transporter .
Northern analysis shows that the ABCB9 mRNA is expressed at a high level in testes and moderate levels in brain and spinal cord .
A splice variant mRNA deleted in the last pair of predicted transmembrane segments was shown to be expressed in human tissues .
Phylogenetic analysis indicates that ABCB9 is closely related to TAP1 and TAP2 , two '' half '' ABC proteins found in endoplasmic reticulum .
ABCB9 protein colocalized with the lysosomal markers , LAMP1 and LAMP2 , in transfected cells .
ABCB9 protein appears to be most highly expressed in the Sertoli cells of the seminiferous tubules in mouse and rat testes .
These cells have high levels of phagocytosis and secretory activities .
These findings pave the way for further investigation into the potential novel function of ABCB9 in lysosomes .
Induction of a novel cellular homolog of interleukin-10, AK155, by transformation of T lymphocytes with herpesvirus saimiri.
Although herpesvirus saimiri-transformed T lymphocytes retain multiple normal T-cell functions , only a few changes have been described .
By subtractive hybridization , we have isolated a novel cellular gene , ak155 , a sequence homolog of the interleukin-10 gene .
Specifically herpesvirus saimiri-transformed T cells overexpress ak155 and secrete the protein into the supernatant .
In other T-cell lines and in native peripheral blood cells , but not in B cells , ak155 is transcribed at low levels .
AK155 forms homodimers similarly to interleukin-10 .
As a lymphokine , AK155 may contribute to the transformed phenotype of human T cells after infection by herpesvirus saimiri .
Human Upf proteins target an mRNA for nonsense-mediated decay when bound downstream of a termination codon.
Nonsense-mediated decay ( NMD ) rids eukaryotic cells of aberrant mRNAs containing premature termination codons .
These are discriminated from true termination codons by downstream cis-elements , such as exon-exon junctions .
We describe three novel human proteins involved in NMD , hUpf2 , hUpf3a , and hUpf3b .
While in HeLa cell extracts these proteins are complexed with hUpf1 , in intact cells hUpf3a and hUpf3b are nucleocytoplasmic shuttling proteins , hUpf2 is perinuclear , and hUpf1 cytoplasmic .
hUpf3a and hUpf3b associate selectively with spliced beta-globin mRNA in vivo , and tethering of any hUpf protein to the 3 ` UTR of beta-globin mRNA elicits NMD .
These data suggest that assembly of a dynamic hUpf complex initiates in the nucleus at mRNA exon-exon junctions and triggers NMD in the cytoplasm when recognized downstream of a translation termination site .
Identification of muscle specific ring finger proteins as potential regulators of the titin kinase domain.
The giant myofibrillar protein titin contains within its C-terminal region a serine-threonine kinase of unknown function .
We have identified a novel muscle specific RING finger protein , referred to as MURF-1 , that binds in vitro to the titin repeats A168\/A169 adjacent to the titin kinase domain .
In myofibrils , MURF-1 is present within the periphery of the M-line lattice in close proximity to titin 's catalytic kinase domain , within the Z-line lattice , and also in soluble form within the cytoplasm .
Yeast two-hybrid screens with MURF-1 as a bait identified two other highly homologous MURF proteins , MURF-2 and MURF-3 .
MURF-1 ,2,3 proteins are encoded by distinct genes , share highly conserved N-terminal RING domains and in vitro form dimers\/heterodimers by shared coiled-coil motifs .
Of the MURF family , only MURF-1 interacts with titin repeats A168\/A169 , whereas MURF-3 has been reported to affect microtubule stability .
Association of MURF-1 with M-line titin may potentially modulate titin 's kinase activity similar to other known kinase-associated proteins , whereas differential expression and heterodimerization of MURF1 , 2 and 3 may link together titin kinase and microtubule-dependent signal pathways in striated muscles .
Identification of a novel fibroblast growth factor, FGF-22, preferentially expressed in the inner root sheath of the hair follicle.
We isolated cDNA encoding a novel fibroblast growth factor ( FGF-22 ) ( 170 amino acids ) from human placenta .
Of the FGF family members , FGF-22 , which appears to be a secreted protein , is most similar to FGF-10 and FGF-7 ( approximately 46 % and approximately 40 % amino acid identities , respectively ) .
The human FGF-22 gene was localized on chromosome 19p13 .3 .
We also isolated mouse cDNA encoding FGF-22 ( 162 amino acids ) from the skin .
Mouse FGF-22 shows high homology ( 87 % amino acid identity ) to human FGF-22 .
Mouse FGF-22 mRNA was found to be preferentially expressed in the skin among the mouse adult tissues examined by Northern blotting analysis .
By in situ hybridization , FGF-22 mRNA in the skin was found to be preferentially expressed in the inner root sheath of the hair follicle .
Therefore , FGF-22 is expected to be a unique FGF that plays a role in hair development .
Human eukaryotic initiation factor EIF2C1 gene: cDNA sequence, genomic organization, localization to chromosomal bands 1p34-p35, and expression.
We report the cloning and characterization of the human eukaryotic protein translation initiation factor EIF2C1 gene .
The human EIF2C1 gene consists of 19 exons and 18 introns that span a region of almost 50 kb .
It is located on the short arm of chromosome 1 in the region 1p34-p35 .
This genomic region is frequently lost in human cancers such as Wilms tumors , neuroblastoma , and carcinomas of the breast , liver , and colon .
The human EIF2C1 gene is ubiquitously expressed at low to medium levels .
Differential polyadenylation and splicing result in a complex transcriptional pattern .
The cDNA sequence is 7478 bp long and contains an extremely large 3 ' untranslated region of 4799 bp with multiple , short repeated segments composed of mono - , tri - , or quattronucleotides interspersed throughout .
The human EIF2C1 gene belongs to a multigene family in human .
It is highly conserved during evolution , sharing about 90 % identity with rabbit eIF2C and 70 % identity with plant AGO1 at the amino acid level .
These facts suggest that human EIF2C1 might play an important physiological role .
Viruses as hijackers of PML nuclear bodies.
Promyelocytic leukemia nuclear bodies ( PML-NBs ) are discrete interchromosomal macromolecular structures .
The integrity of this dynamic nuclear subcompartment critically depends on the presence of the name-giving PML protein .
Among the permanent or transient residents of PML-NBs are various regulatory proteins , including Sp100 , CBP , pRb , HIPK2 , RAD51 and p53 .
PML-NBs are frequently targeted by viral infections , as a number of different RNA and DNA viruses , including herpesviruses , adenoviruses , papovaviruses , papillomaviruses and arenaviruses , cause changes in PML-NBs .
Viruses interfere with PML-NB in two ways : 1 ) some viral proteins can associate with PML-NB proteins and\/or lead to the destruction and lysis of this subnuclear compartment , thus aiding viral gene expression and disabling the host 's innate immunity ; 2 ) the parental genomes of some nuclear-replicating DNA viruses associate preferentially with PML-NBs , which presumably serves to assist in viral gene expression or replication .
Here we feature the different viral strategies leading to the hijacking of PML-NBs and discuss the consequences for the immune response .
Characterisation of a new human and murine member of the DnaJ family of proteins.
We report the characterisation of a human gene , designated MCG18 ( multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 candidate gene 18 ) , that encodes a new member of the DnaJ family of proteins .
Database searches indicate that MCG18 also has the locus name HSPF2 .
MCG18 lies 250bp centromeric of the VRF\/VEGFB gene on chromosome 11q13 .
The MCG18 cDNA is predicted to encode a 241 amino acid product that has partial homology to Escherichia coli dnaJ in that it contains the J domain .
However , MCG18 has greatest similarity to a functionally undefined protein from Caenorhabditis elegans , both of which are predicted to have a membrane-spanning region adjacent to their J domains .
The cDNA encoding the murine homolog ( Mcg18 ) was also cloned and sequenced , and the encoded protein shares 81 % similarity to MCG18 .
The coding region of MCG18 is interrupted by 4 introns and the mRNA is expressed as a 1.4 kb message in all tissues examined , including those derived from the breast , ovary , bladder , lung and keratinocytes .
Isolation and functional analysis of a cDNA for human Jagged2, a gene encoding a ligand for the Notch1 receptor.
Signaling through Notch receptors has been implicated in the control of cellular differentiation in animals ranging from nematodes to humans .
Starting from a human expressed sequence tag-containing sequence resembling that of Serrate , the gene for a ligand of Drosophila melanogaster Notch , we assembled a full-length cDNA , now called human Jagged2 , from overlapping cDNA clones .
The full-length cDNA encodes a polypeptide having extensive sequence homology to Serrate ( 40.6 % identity and 58.7 % similarity ) and even greater homology to several putative mammalian Notch ligands that have subsequently been described .
When in situ hybridization was performed , expression of the murine Jagged2 homolog was found to be highest in fetal thymus , epidermis , foregut , dorsal root ganglia , and inner ear .
In Northern blot analysis of RNA from tissues of 2-week-old mice , the 5.0-kb Jagged2 transcript was most abundant in heart , lung , thymus , skeletal muscle , brain , and testis .
Immunohistochemistry revealed coexpression of Jagged2 and Notch1 within thymus and other fetal murine tissues , consistent with interaction of the two proteins in vivo .
Coculture of fibroblasts expressing human Jagged2 with murine C2C12 myoblasts inhibited myogenic differentiation , accompanied by increased Notch1 and the appearance of a novel 115-kDa Notch1 fragment .
Exposure of C2C12 cells to Jagged2 led to increased amounts of Notch mRNA as well as mRNAs for a second Notch receptor , Notch3 , and a second Notch ligand , Jagged1 .
Constitutively active forms of Notchl in C2C12 cells also induced increased levels of the same set of mRNAs , suggesting positive feedback control of these genes initiated by binding of Jagged2 to Notch1 .
This feedback control may function in vivo to coordinate differentiation across certain groups of progenitor cells adopting identical cell fates .
A human gene coding for a membrane-associated nucleic acid-binding protein.
Studies to clone a cell-surface DNA-binding protein involved in the binding and internalization of extracellular DNA have led to the isolation of a gene for a membrane-associated nucleic acid-binding protein ( MNAB ) .
The full-length cDNA is 4.3 kilobases with an open reading frame of 3576 base pairs encoding a protein of approximately 130 kDa ( GenBank accession numbers and ) .
The MNAB gene is on human chromosome 9 with wide expression in normal tissues and tumor cells .
A C3HC4 RING finger and a CCCH zinc finger have been identified in the amino-terminal half of the protein .
MNAB bound DNA ( K ( D ) approximately 4 nm ) and mutagenesis of a single conserved amino acid in the zinc finger reduced DNA binding by 50 % .
A potential transmembrane domain exists near the carboxyl terminus .
Antibodies against the amino-terminal half of the protein immunoprecipitated a protein of molecular mass approximately 150 kDa and reacted with cell surfaces .
The MNAB protein is membrane-associated and primarily localized to the perinuclear space , probably to the endoplasmic reticulum or trans-Golgi network .
Characterization of the MNAB protein as a cell-surface DNA-binding protein , critical in binding and internalization of extracellular DNA , awaits confirmation of its localization to cell surfaces .
Mirk protein kinase is activated by MKK3 and functions as a transcriptional activator of HNF1alpha.
Mirk\/Dyrk1B is an arginine-directed serine\/threonine protein kinase that is expressed at low levels in most normal tissues but at elevated levels in many tumor cell lines and in normal skeletal muscle .
Colon carcinoma cell lines stably overexpressing Mirk proliferated in serum-free medium , but the mechanism of Mirk action is unknown .
DCoHm ( dimerization cofactor of hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha ( HNF1alpha ) from muscle ) , a novel gene of the DCoH family with 78 % amino acid identity to DCoH , was identified as a Mirk-binding protein by yeast two-hybrid analysis and cloned .
Mirk co-immunoprecipitated with DCoHm and bound to DCoHm in glutathione S-transferase pull-down assays .
DCoH stabilizes HNF1alpha as a dimer and enhances its transcriptional activity on the beta-fibrinogen promoter reporter , and DCoHm had similar activity .
Mirk enhanced HNF1alpha transcriptional activity in a dose-dependent manner , whereas two kinase-inactive Mirk mutants and a Mirk N-terminal deletion mutant did not .
Mirk , DCoHm , and HNF1alpha formed a complex .
Mirk bound to a specific region within the CREB-binding protein-binding region of HNF1alpha and phosphorylated HNF1alpha at a site adjacent to the Mirk-binding region .
Conversely , the HNF1alpha binding domain was located within the first five conserved kinase subdomains of Mirk .
Mirk co-immunoprecipitated with the MAPK kinase MKK3 , an upstream activator of p38 .
MKK3 enhanced Mirk kinase activity and the transcriptional activation of HNF1alpha by Mirk , suggesting that Mirk , like p38 , is activated by certain environmental stress agents .
The Mirk-binding protein DCoH has been shown to be selectively expressed in colon carcinomas but not in normal tissue .
Mirk may function as an HNF1alpha transcriptional activator in response to an MKK3-mediated stress signal , and the selective expression of DCoH could restrict the Mirk response to carcinoma cells .
Molecular cloning and preliminary functional analysis of two novel human KRAB zinc finger proteins, HKr18 and HKr19.
cDNA clones encoding two novel human KRAB zinc finger proteins , HKr18 and HKr19 , were isolated from a human testis cDNA library .
Their corresponding genes were later identified in sequences originating from chromosomes 19 and 7 , respectively .
On the basis of the collected information from gene and cDNA sequences , Hkr18 was found to be a protein of 94 kDa with 20 zinc finger motifs in its C terminus .
The HKr19 is a smaller protein , with a molecular weight of 56 kDa containing 11 zinc finger motifs .
Both HKr18 and HKr19 contained a KRAB A as well as a KRAB B domain in their N termini .
Northern blot analysis showed expression of HKr18 in all human tissues tested , indicating a ubiquitous expression pattern .
In contrast , HKr19 showed a more restricted tissue distribution , with detectable expression primarily in testis and fetal tissues .
The HKr19 protein is a member of the large ZNF91 subfamily of KRAB zinc finger genes .
A PCR-based analysis of the expression of HKr19 and other closely related genes showed that lymphoid , myeloid , and nonhematopoietic cells expressed different sets of these genes .
This latter finding indicates that some members of the ZNF91 family may be involved in regulating lineage commitment during hematopoietic development .
Transfection of various parts of HKr19 into human embryonic kidney cells ( HEK 293 cells ) showed that the entire protein and its zinc finger region were toxic to these cells when expressed at high levels .
In contrast , the KRAB domain and the linker region seemed to be well tolerated .
Lad, an adapter protein interacting with the SH2 domain of p56lck, is required for T cell activation.
T cell-specific Src family tyrosine kinase , p56lck , plays crucial roles in T cell differentiation , activation , and proliferation .
These multiple functions of p56lck are believed to be conducted through the protein-protein interactions with various cellular signaling proteins .
To clarify the mechanisms through which p56lck contributes to T cell signaling , we identified the proteins binding to the Src homology 2 ( SH2 ) domain of p56lck through a tyrosine phosphorylation-dependent yeast two-hybrid screening .
Subsequent characterization of positive clones revealed the presence of a protein of 366 aa named Lad ( Lck-associated adapter protein ) , which is a potential murine homolog of previously reported TSAd , a T cell-specific adapter protein .
Lad contains several protein-protein interaction domains including a zinc-finger motif , an SH2 domain , a proline-rich SH3 binding motif , and several phosphotyrosine sites .
Furthermore , Lad was tyrosine phosphorylated and associated with p56lck in vivo and redistributed from cytoplasm to the plasma membrane in a T cell activation-dependent manner .
Moreover in T cells , IL-2 promoter activity was enhanced upon coexpression of Lad but was inhibited by the coexpression of antisense Lad RNA .
These characteristics of Lad suggest that Lad play an essential role as an adapter protein in p56lck-mediated T cell signaling .
Assignment of the PSST subunit gene of human mitochondrial complex I to chromosome 19p13.
The cDNA for the PSST subunit of human mitochondrial nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide ( NADH ) : ubiquinone oxidoreductase ( complex I ; NADH dehydrogenase ( ubiquinone ) , Fe-S ( 20 kDa ) ; EC 1.6.5.3 ) was generated by polymerase chain reaction ( PCR ) amplification of human cDNA .
The sequence of the mature protein deduced from the cDNA codes for a protein that is closely related to the bovine protein ( 93 % homology ) .
Nine conservative substitutions are found in the mature protein , mainly in the N and C terminal regions .
The mature human protein is missing four amino acids ( PAAL ) close to the N terminus that are present in the bovine protein .
The N terminus of the mature protein is preceded by a presequence of 38 amino acids that , although quite different from its bovine counterpart ( 52 % homology ) , has properties that are characteristic of a mitochondrial import sequence .
Southern hybridization analysis predicts an estimated gene size of 3.8 kb .
Northern hybridization analysis of mRNA from fibroblasts of complex I-deficient patients revealed no size or transcript level abnormalities .
The cDNA of the PSST protein was used to investigate tissue-specific expression and to localize the gene for this subunit to chromosome 19p13 .
Three novel components of the human exosome.
The yeast exosome is a complex of 3 ' -- ) 5 ' exoribonucleases .
Sequence analysis identified putative human homologs for exosome components , although several were found only as expressed sequence tags .
Here we report the cloning of full-length cDNAs , which encode putative human homologs of the Rrp40p , Rrp41p , and Rrp46p components of the exosome .
Recombinant proteins were expressed and used to raise rabbit antisera .
In Western blotting experiments , these decorated HeLa cell proteins of the predicted sizes .
All three human proteins were enriched in the HeLa cells nucleus and nucleolus , but were also clearly detected in the cytoplasm .
Size exclusion chromatography revealed that hRrp40p , hRrp41p , and hRrp46p were present in a large complex .
This cofractionated with the human homologs of other exosome components , hRrp4p and PM\/Scl -100 .
Anti-PM\/Scl-positive patient sera coimmunoprecipitated hRrp40p , hRrp41p , and hRrp46p demonstrating their physical association .
The immunoprecipitated complex exhibited 3 ' -- ) 5 ' exoribonuclease activity in vitro .
hRrp41p was expressed in yeast and shown to suppress the lethality of genetic depletion of yeast Rrp41p .
We conclude that hRrp40p , hRrp41p , and hRrp46p represent novel components of the human exosome complex .
